VOLUME
I.
CHAPTER
I.
WHICH
TREATS
OF
 THE CHARACTER AND PURSUITS OF THE FAMOUS GENTLEMAN DON QUIXOTE OF LA
MANCHA In a village of La Mancha, the name of which I have no desire
to call to mind, there lived not long since one of those gentlemen
that keep a lance in the lance-rack, an old buckler, a lean hack, and
a greyhound for coursing. An olla of rather more beef than mutton, a
salad on most nights, scraps on Saturdays, lentils on Fridays, and a
pigeon or so extra on Sundays, made away with three-quarters of his
income. The rest of it went in a doublet of fine cloth and velvet
breeches and shoes to match for holidays, while on week-days he made a
brave figure in his best homespun. He had in his house a housekeeper
past forty, a niece under twenty, and a lad for the field and
market-place, who used to saddle the hack as well as handle the
bill-hook. The age of this gentleman of ours was bordering on fifty;
he was of a hardy habit, spare, gaunt-featured, a very early riser and
a great sportsman. They will have it his surname was Quixada or
Quesada (for here there is some difference of opinion among the
authors who write on the subject), although from reasonable
conjectures it seems plain that he was called Quexana. This, however,
is of but little importance to our tale; it will be enough not to
stray a hair's breadth from the truth in the telling of it. You must
know, then, that the above-named gentleman whenever he was at leisure
(which was mostly all the year round) gave himself up to reading books
of chivalry with such ardour and avidity that he almost entirely
neglected the pursuit of his field-sports, and even the management of
his property; and to such a pitch did his eagerness and infatuation go
that he sold many an acre of tillageland to buy books of chivalry to
read, and brought home as many of them as he could get. But of all
there were none he liked so well as those of the famous Feliciano de
Silva's composition, for their lucidity of style and complicated
conceits were as pearls in his sight, particularly when in his reading
he came upon courtships and cartels, where he often found passages
like "the reason of the unreason with which my reason is afflicted so
weakens my reason that with reason I murmur at your beauty;" or again,
"the high heavens, that of your divinity divinely fortify you with the
stars, render you deserving of the desert your greatness deserves."
Over conceits of this sort the poor gentleman lost his wits, and used
to lie awake striving to understand them and worm the meaning out of
them; what Aristotle himself could not have made out or extracted had
he come to life again for that special purpose. He was not at all easy
about the wounds which Don Belianis gave and took, because it seemed
to him that, great as were the surgeons who had cured him, he must
have had his face and body covered all over with seams and scars. He
commended, however, the author's way of ending his book with the
promise of that interminable adventure, and many a time was he tempted
to take up his pen and finish it properly as is there proposed, which
no doubt he would have done, and made a successful piece of work of it
too, had not greater and more absorbing thoughts prevented him. Many
an argument did he have with the curate of his village (a learned man,
and a graduate of Siguenza) as to which had been the better knight,
Palmerin of England or Amadis of Gaul. Master Nicholas, the village
barber, however, used to say that neither of them came up to the
Knight of Phoebus, and that if there was any that could compare with
him it was Don Galaor, the brother of Amadis of Gaul, because he had a
spirit that was equal to every occasion, and was no finikin knight,
nor lachrymose like his brother, while in the matter of valour he was
not a whit behind him. In short, he became so absorbed in his books
that he spent his nights from sunset to sunrise, and his days from
dawn to dark, poring over them; and what with little sleep and much
reading his brains got so dry that he lost his wits. His fancy grew
full of what he used to read about in his books, enchantments,
quarrels, battles, challenges, wounds, wooings, loves, agonies, and
all sorts of impossible nonsense; and it so possessed his mind that
the whole fabric of invention and fancy he read of was true, that to
him no history in the world had more reality in it. He used to say the
Cid Ruy Diaz was a very good knight, but that he was not to be
compared with the Knight of the Burning Sword who with one back-stroke
cut in half two fierce and monstrous giants. He thought more of
Bernardo del Carpio because at Roncesvalles he slew Roland in spite of
enchantments, availing himself of the artifice of Hercules when he
strangled Antaeus the son of Terra in his arms. He approved highly of
the giant Morgante, because, although of the giant breed which is
always arrogant and ill-conditioned, he alone was affable and
well-bred. But above all he admired Reinaldos of Montalban, especially
when he saw him sallying forth from his castle and robbing everyone he
met, and when beyond the seas he stole that image of Mahomet which, as
his history says, was entirely of gold. To have a bout of kicking at
that traitor of a Ganelon he would have given his housekeeper, and his
niece into the bargain. In short, his wits being quite gone, he hit
upon the strangest notion that ever madman in this world hit upon, and
that was that he fancied it was right and requisite, as well for the
support of his own honour as for the service of his country, that he
should make a knight-errant of himself, roaming the world over in full
armour and on horseback in quest of adventures, and putting in
practice himself all that he had read of as being the usual practices
of knights-errant; righting every kind of wrong, and exposing himself
to peril and danger from which, in the issue, he was to reap eternal
renown and fame. Already the poor man saw himself crowned by the might
of his arm Emperor of Trebizond at least; and so, led away by the
intense enjoyment he found in these pleasant fancies, he set himself
forthwith to put his scheme into execution. The first thing he did was
to clean up some armour that had belonged to his great-grandfather,
and had been for ages lying forgotten in a corner eaten with rust and
covered with mildew. He scoured and polished it as best he could, but
he perceived one great defect in it, that it had no closed helmet,
nothing but a simple morion. This deficiency, however, his ingenuity
supplied, for he contrived a kind of half-helmet of pasteboard which,
fitted on to the morion, looked like a whole one. It is true that, in
order to see if it was strong and fit to stand a cut, he drew his
sword and gave it a couple of slashes, the first of which undid in an
instant what had taken him a week to do. The ease with which he had
knocked it to pieces disconcerted him somewhat, and to guard against
that danger he set to work again, fixing bars of iron on the inside
until he was satisfied with its strength; and then, not caring to try
any more experiments with it, he passed it and adopted it as a helmet
of the most perfect construction. He next proceeded to inspect his
hack, which, with more quartos than a real and more blemishes than the
steed of Gonela, that "tantum pellis et ossa fuit," surpassed in his
eyes the Bucephalus of Alexander or the Babieca of the Cid. Four days
were spent in thinking what name to give him, because (as he said to
himself) it was not right that a horse belonging to a knight so
famous, and one with such merits of his own, should be without some
distinctive name, and he strove to adapt it so as to indicate what he
had been before belonging to a knight-errant, and what he then was;
for it was only reasonable that, his master taking a new character, he
should take a new name, and that it should be a distinguished and
full-sounding one, befitting the new order and calling he was about to
follow. And so, after having composed, struck out, rejected, added to,
unmade, and remade a multitude of names out of his memory and fancy,
he decided upon calling him Rocinante, a name, to his thinking, lofty,
sonorous, and significant of his condition as a hack before he became
what he now was, the first and foremost of all the hacks in the world.
Having got a name for his horse so much to his taste, he was anxious
to get one for himself, and he was eight days more pondering over this
point, till at last he made up his mind to call himself "Don Quixote,"
whence, as has been already said, the authors of this veracious
history have inferred that his name must have been beyond a doubt
Quixada, and not Quesada as others would have it. Recollecting,
however, that the valiant Amadis was not content to call himself
curtly Amadis and nothing more, but added the name of his kingdom and
country to make it famous, and called himself Amadis of Gaul, he, like
a good knight, resolved to add on the name of his, and to style
himself Don Quixote of La Mancha, whereby, he considered, he described
accurately his origin and country, and did honour to it in taking his
surname from it. So then, his armour being furbished, his morion
turned into a helmet, his hack christened, and he himself confirmed,
he came to the conclusion that nothing more was needed now but to look
out for a lady to be in love with; for a knight-errant without love
was like a tree without leaves or fruit, or a body without a soul. As
he said to himself, "If, for my sins, or by my good fortune, I come
across some giant hereabouts, a common occurrence with knights-errant,
and overthrow him in one onslaught, or cleave him asunder to the
waist, or, in short, vanquish and subdue him, will it not be well to
have some one I may send him to as a present, that he may come in and
fall on his knees before my sweet lady, and in a humble, submissive
voice say, 'I am the giant Caraculiambro, lord of the island of
Malindrania, vanquished in single combat by the never sufficiently
extolled knight Don Quixote of La Mancha, who has commanded me to
present myself before your Grace, that your Highness dispose of me at
your pleasure'?" Oh, how our good gentleman enjoyed the delivery of
this speech, especially when he had thought of some one to call his
Lady! There was, so the story goes, in a village near his own a very
good-looking farm-girl with whom he had been at one time in love,
though, so far as is known, she never knew it nor gave a thought to
the matter. Her name was Aldonza Lorenzo, and upon her he thought fit
to confer the title of Lady of his Thoughts; and after some search for
a name which should not be out of harmony with her own, and should
suggest and indicate that of a princess and great lady, he decided
upon calling her Dulcinea del Toboso--she being of El Toboso--a name,
to his mind, musical, uncommon, and significant, like all those he had
already bestowed upon himself and the things belonging to him. CHAPTER
II. WHICH TREATS OF THE FIRST SALLY THE INGENIOUS DON QUIXOTE MADE
FROM HOME These preliminaries settled, he did not care to put off any
longer the execution of his design, urged on to it by the thought of
all the world was losing by his delay, seeing what wrongs he intended
to right, grievances to redress, injustices to repair, abuses to
remove, and duties to discharge. So, without giving notice of his
intention to anyone, and without anybody seeing him, one morning
before the dawning of the day (which was one of the hottest of the
month of July) he donned his suit of armour, mounted Rocinante with
his patched-up helmet on, braced his buckler, took his lance, and by
the back door of the yard sallied forth upon the plain in the highest
contentment and satisfaction at seeing with what ease he had made a
beginning with his grand purpose. But scarcely did he find himself
upon the open plain, when a terrible thought struck him, one all but
enough to make him abandon the enterprise at the very outset. It
occurred to him that he had not been dubbed a knight, for it was plain
to him he could not lawfully engage in any adventure without receiving
the order of knighthood. CHAPTER III. WHEREIN IS RELATED THE DROLL WAY
IN WHICH DON QUIXOTE HAD HIMSELF DUBBED A KNIGHT Harassed by this
reflection, he made haste with his scanty pothouse supper, and having
finished it called the landlord, and shutting himself into the stable
with him, fell on his knees before him, saying, "From this spot I rise
not, valiant knight, until your courtesy grants me the boon I seek,
one that will redound to your praise and the benefit of the human
race." The landlord, seeing his guest at his feet and hearing a speech
of this kind, stood staring at him in bewilderment, not knowing what
to do or say, and entreating him to rise, but all to no purpose until
he had agreed to grant the boon demanded of him. "I looked for no
less, my lord, from your High Magnificence," replied Don Quixote, "and
I have to tell you that the common people consider your worship a
mighty great madman, and me no less a fool. The hidalgos say that, not
keeping within the bounds of your quality of gentleman, you have
assumed the 'Don,' and made a knight of yourself at a jump, with four
vine-stocks and a couple of acres of land, and never a shirt to your
back. The caballeros say they do not want to have hidalgos setting up
in opposition to them, particularly squire hidalgos who polish their
own shoes and darn their black stockings with green silk." "That,"
said Don Quixote, "does not apply to me, for I always go well dressed
and never patched; ragged I may be, but ragged more from the wear and
tear of arms than of time." "As to your worship's valour, courtesy,
accomplishments, and task, there is a variety of opinions. Some say,
'mad but droll;' others, 'valiant but unlucky;' others, 'courteous but
meddling,' and then they go into such a number of things that they
don't leave a whole bone either in your worship or in myself."
"Recollect, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "that wherever virtue exists in
an eminent degree it is persecuted. Few or none of the famous men that
have lived escaped being calumniated by malice. Julius Caesar, the
boldest, wisest, and bravest of captains, was charged with being
ambitious, and not particularly cleanly in his dress, or pure in his
morals. Of Alexander, whose deeds won him the name of Great, they say
that he was somewhat of a drunkard. Of Hercules, him of the many
labours, it is said that he was lewd and luxurious. Of Don Galaor, the
brother of Amadis of Gaul, it was whispered that he was over
quarrelsome, and of his brother that he was lachrymose. So that, O
Sancho, amongst all these calumnies against good men, mine may be let
pass, since they are no more than thou hast said." "That's just where
it is, body of my father!" "Is there more, then?" asked Don Quixote.
"There's the tail to be skinned yet," said Sancho; "all so far is
cakes and fancy bread; but if your worship wants to know all about the
calumnies they bring against you, I will fetch you one this instant
who can tell you the whole of them without missing an atom; for last
night the son of Bartholomew Carrasco, who has been studying at
Salamanca, came home after having been made a bachelor, and when I
went to welcome him, he told me that your worship's history is already
abroad in books, with the title of THE INGENIOUS GENTLEMAN DON QUIXOTE
OF LA MANCHA; and he says they mention me in it by my own name of
Sancho Panza, and the lady Dulcinea del Toboso too, and divers things
that happened to us when we were alone; so that I crossed myself in my
wonder how the historian who wrote them down could have known them."
"I promise thee, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "the author of our history
will be some sage enchanter; for to such nothing that they choose to
write about is hidden." "What!" said Sancho, "a sage and an enchanter!
Why, the bachelor Samson Carrasco (that is the name of him I spoke of)
says the author of the history is called Cide Hamete Berengena." "That
is a Moorish name," said Don Quixote. "May be so," replied Sancho;
"for I have heard say that the Moors are mostly great lovers of
berengenas." "Thou must have mistaken the surname of this
'Cide'--which means in Arabic 'Lord'--Sancho," observed Don Quixote.
"Very likely," replied Sancho, "but if your worship wishes me to fetch
the bachelor I will go for him in a twinkling." "Thou wilt do me a
great pleasure, my friend," said Don Quixote, "for what thou hast told
me has amazed me, and I shall not eat a morsel that will agree with me
until I have heard all about it." "Then I am off for him," said
Sancho; and leaving his master he went in quest of the bachelor, with
whom he returned in a short time, and, all three together, they had a
very droll colloquy. CHAPTER III. OF THE LAUGHABLE CONVERSATION THAT
PASSED BETWEEN DON QUIXOTE, SANCHO PANZA, AND THE BACHELOR SAMSON
CARRASCO Don Quixote remained very deep in thought, waiting for the
bachelor Carrasco, from whom he was to hear how he himself had been
put into a book as Sancho said; and he could not persuade himself that
any such history could be in existence, for the blood of the enemies
he had slain was not yet dry on the blade of his sword, and now they
wanted to make out that his mighty achievements were going about in
print. For all that, he fancied some sage, either a friend or an
enemy, might, by the aid of magic, have given them to the press; if a
friend, in order to magnify and exalt them above the most famous ever
achieved by any knight-errant; if an enemy, to bring them to naught
and degrade them below the meanest ever recorded of any low squire,
though as he said to himself, the achievements of squires never were
recorded. If, however, it were the fact that such a history were in
existence, it must necessarily, being the story of a knight-errant, be
grandiloquent, lofty, imposing, grand and true. With this he comforted
himself somewhat, though it made him uncomfortable to think that the
author was a Moor, judging by the title of "Cide;" and that no truth
was to be looked for from Moors, as they are all impostors, cheats,
and schemers. He was afraid he might have dealt with his love affairs
in some indecorous fashion, that might tend to the discredit and
prejudice of the purity of his lady Dulcinea del Toboso; he would have
had him set forth the fidelity and respect he had always observed
towards her, spurning queens, empresses, and damsels of all sorts, and
keeping in check the impetuosity of his natural impulses. Absorbed and
wrapped up in these and divers other cogitations, he was found by
Sancho and Carrasco, whom Don Quixote received with great courtesy.
The bachelor, though he was called Samson, was of no great bodily
size, but he was a very great wag; he was of a sallow complexion, but
very sharp-witted, somewhere about four-and-twenty years of age, with
a round face, a flat nose, and a large mouth, all indications of a
mischievous disposition and a love of fun and jokes; and of this he
gave a sample as soon as he saw Don Quixote, by falling on his knees
before him and saying, "Let me kiss your mightiness's hand, Senor Don
Quixote of La Mancha, for, by the habit of St. Peter that I wear,
though I have no more than the first four orders, your worship is one
of the most famous knights-errant that have ever been, or will be, all
the world over. A blessing on Cide Hamete Benengeli, who has written
the history of your great deeds, and a double blessing on that
connoisseur who took the trouble of having it translated out of the
Arabic into our Castilian vulgar tongue for the universal
entertainment of the people!" Don Quixote made him rise, and said,
"So, then, it is true that there is a history of me, and that it was a
Moor and a sage who wrote it?" "So true is it, senor," said Samson,
"that my belief is there are more than twelve thousand volumes of the
said history in print this very day. Only ask Portugal, Barcelona, and
Valencia, where they have been printed, and moreover there is a report
that it is being printed at Antwerp, and I am persuaded there will not
be a country or language in which there will not be a translation of
it." "One of the things," here observed Don Quixote, "that ought to
give most pleasure to a virtuous and eminent man is to find himself in
his lifetime in print and in type, familiar in people's mouths with a
good name; I say with a good name, for if it be the opposite, then
there is no death to be compared to it." "If it goes by good name and
fame," said the bachelor, "your worship alone bears away the palm from
all the knights-errant; for the Moor in his own language, and the
Christian in his, have taken care to set before us your gallantry,
your high courage in encountering dangers, your fortitude in
adversity, your patience under misfortunes as well as wounds, the
purity and continence of the platonic loves of your worship and my
lady Dona Dulcinea del Toboso-" "I never heard my lady Dulcinea called
Dona," observed Sancho here; "nothing more than the lady Dulcinea del
Toboso; so here already the history is wrong." "That is not an
objection of any importance," replied Carrasco. "Certainly not," said
Don Quixote; "but tell me, senor bachelor, what deeds of mine are they
that are made most of in this history?" "On that point," replied the
bachelor, "opinions differ, as tastes do; some swear by the adventure
of the windmills that your worship took to be Briareuses and giants;
others by that of the fulling mills; one cries up the description of
the two armies that afterwards took the appearance of two droves of
sheep; another that of the dead body on its way to be buried at
Segovia; a third says the liberation of the galley slaves is the best
of all, and a fourth that nothing comes up to the affair with the
Benedictine giants, and the battle with the valiant Biscayan." "Tell
me, senor bachelor," said Sancho at this point, "does the adventure
with the Yanguesans come in, when our good Rocinante went hankering
after dainties?" "The sage has left nothing in the ink-bottle,"
replied Samson; "he tells all and sets down everything, even to the
capers that worthy Sancho cut in the blanket." "I cut no capers in the
blanket," returned Sancho; "in the air I did, and more of them than I
liked." "There is no human history in the world, I suppose," said Don
Quixote, "that has not its ups and downs, but more than others such as
deal with chivalry, for they can never be entirely made up of
prosperous adventures." "For all that," replied the bachelor, "there
are those who have read the history who say they would have been glad
if the author had left out some of the countless cudgellings that were
inflicted on Senor Don Quixote in various encounters." "That's where
the truth of the history comes in," said Sancho. "At the same time
they might fairly have passed them over in silence," observed Don
Quixote; "for there is no need of recording events which do not change
or affect the truth of a history, if they tend to bring the hero of it
into contempt. AEneas was not in truth and earnest so pious as Virgil
represents him, nor Ulysses so wise as Homer describes him." "That is
true," said Samson; "but it is one thing to write as a poet, another
to write as a historian; the poet may describe or sing things, not as
they were, but as they ought to have been; but the historian has to
write them down, not as they ought to have been, but as they were,
without adding anything to the truth or taking anything from it."
"Well then," said Sancho, "if this senor Moor goes in for telling the
truth, no doubt among my master's drubbings mine are to be found; for
they never took the measure of his worship's shoulders without doing
the same for my whole body; but I have no right to wonder at that,
for, as my master himself says, the members must share the pain of the
head." "You are a sly dog, Sancho," said Don Quixote; "i' faith, you
have no want of memory when you choose to remember." "If I were to try
to forget the thwacks they gave me," said Sancho, "my weals would not
let me, for they are still fresh on my ribs." "Hush, Sancho," said Don
Quixote, "and don't interrupt the bachelor, whom I entreat to go on
and tell all that is said about me in this history." "And about me,"
said Sancho, "for they say, too, that I am one of the principal
presonages in it." "Personages, not presonages, friend Sancho," said
Samson. "What! Another word-catcher!" said Sancho; "if that's to be
the way we shall not make an end in a lifetime." "May God shorten
mine, Sancho," returned the bachelor, "if you are not the second
person in the history, and there are even some who would rather hear
you talk than the cleverest in the whole book; though there are some,
too, who say you showed yourself over-credulous in believing there was
any possibility in the government of that island offered you by Senor
Don Quixote." "There is still sunshine on the wall," said Don Quixote;
"and when Sancho is somewhat more advanced in life, with the
experience that years bring, he will be fitter and better qualified
for being a governor than he is at present." "By God, master," said
Sancho, "the island that I cannot govern with the years I have, I'll
not be able to govern with the years of Methuselah; the difficulty is
that the said island keeps its distance somewhere, I know not where;
and not that there is any want of head in me to govern it." "Leave it
to God, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "for all will be and perhaps better
than you think; no leaf on the tree stirs but by God's will." "That is
true," said Samson; "and if it be God's will, there will not be any
want of a thousand islands, much less one, for Sancho to govern." "I
have seen governors in these parts," said Sancho, "that are not to be
compared to my shoe-sole; and for all that they are called 'your
lordship' and served on silver." "Those are not governors of islands,"
observed Samson, "but of other governments of an easier kind: those
that govern islands must at least know grammar." "I could manage the
gram well enough," said Sancho; "but for the mar I have neither
leaning nor liking, for I don't know what it is; but leaving this
matter of the government in God's hands, to send me wherever it may be
most to his service, I may tell you, senor bachelor Samson Carrasco,
it has pleased me beyond measure that the author of this history
should have spoken of me in such a way that what is said of me gives
no offence; for, on the faith of a true squire, if he had said
anything about me that was at all unbecoming an old Christian, such as
I am, the deaf would have heard of it." "That would be working
miracles," said Samson. "Miracles or no miracles," said Sancho, "let
everyone mind how he speaks or writes about people, and not set down
at random the first thing that comes into his head." "One of the
faults they find with this history," said the bachelor, "is that its
author inserted in it a novel called 'The Ill-advised Curiosity;' not
that it is bad or ill-told, but that it is out of place and has
nothing to do with the history of his worship Senor Don Quixote." "I
will bet the son of a dog has mixed the cabbages and the baskets,"
said Sancho. "Then, I say," said Don Quixote, "the author of my
history was no sage, but some ignorant chatterer, who, in a haphazard
and heedless way, set about writing it, let it turn out as it might,
just as Orbaneja, the painter of Ubeda, used to do, who, when they
asked him what he was painting, used to say, 'Whatever it may turn
out; and if he chanced to paint a cock he would write under it, 'This
is a cock,' for fear they might think it was a fox. The painter or
writer, for it's all the same, who published the history of this new
Don Quixote that has come out, must have been one of this sort I
think, Sancho, for he painted or wrote 'whatever it might turn out;'
or perhaps he is like a poet called Mauleon that was about the Court
some years ago, who used to answer at haphazard whatever he was asked,
and on one asking him what Deum de Deo meant, he replied De donde
diere. But, putting this aside, tell me, Sancho, hast thou a mind to
have another turn at thyself to-night, and wouldst thou rather have it
indoors or in the open air?" "Egad, senor," said Sancho, "for what I'm
going to give myself, it comes all the same to me whether it is in a
house or in the fields; still I'd like it to be among trees; for I
think they are company for me and help me to bear my pain
wonderfully." "And yet it must not be, Sancho my friend," said Don
Quixote; "but, to enable thee to recover strength, we must keep it for
our own village; for at the latest we shall get there the day after
tomorrow." Sancho said he might do as he pleased; but that for his own
part he would like to finish off the business quickly before his blood
cooled and while he had an appetite, because "in delay there is apt to
be danger" very often, and "praying to God and plying the hammer," and
"one take was better than two I'll give thee's," and "a sparrow in the
hand than a vulture on the wing." "For God's sake, Sancho, no more
proverbs!" exclaimed Don Quixote; "it seems to me thou art becoming
sicut erat again; speak in a plain, simple, straight-forward way, as I
have often told thee, and thou wilt find the good of it." "I don't
know what bad luck it is of mine," argument to my mind; however, I
mean to mend said Sancho, "but I can't utter a word without a proverb
that is not as good as an argument to my mind; however, I mean to mend
said Sancho, "but I can't utter a word without a proverb that is not
as good as an argument to my mind; however, I mean to mend if I can;"
and so for the present the conversation ended. CHAPTER LXXII. OF HOW
DON QUIXOTE AND SANCHO REACHED THEIR VILLAGE CHAPTER LXXIII OF THE
OMENS DON QUIXOTE HAD AS HE ENTERED HIS OWN VILLAGE, AND OTHER
INCIDENTS THAT EMBELLISH AND GIVE A COLOUR TO THIS GREAT HISTORY
CHAPTER LXXIV OF HOW DON QUIXOTE FELL SICK, AND OF THE WILL HE MADE,
AND HOW HE DIED As nothing that is man's can last for ever, but all
tends ever downwards from its beginning to its end, and above all
man's life, and as Don Quixote's enjoyed no special dispensation from
heaven to stay its course, its end and close came when he least looked
for it. For-whether it was of the dejection the thought of his defeat
produced, or of heaven's will that so ordered it--a fever settled upon
him and kept him in his bed for six days, during which he was often
visited by his friends the curate, the bachelor, and the barber, while
his good squire Sancho Panza never quitted his bedside. They,
persuaded that it was grief at finding himself vanquished, and the
object of his heart, the liberation and disenchantment of Dulcinea,
unattained, that kept him in this state, strove by all the means in
their power to cheer him up; the bachelor bidding him take heart and
get up to begin his pastoral life, for which he himself, he said, had
already composed an eclogue that would take the shine out of all
Sannazaro had ever written, and had bought with his own money two
famous dogs to guard the flock, one called Barcino and the other
Butron, which a herdsman of Quintanar had sold him. But for all this
Don Quixote could not shake off his sadness. His friends called in the
doctor, who felt his pulse and was not very well satisfied with it,
and said that in any case it would be well for him to attend to the
health of his soul, as that of his body was in a bad way. Don Quixote
heard this calmly; but not so his housekeeper, his niece, and his
squire, who fell weeping bitterly, as if they had him lying dead
before them. The doctor's opinion was that melancholy and depression
were bringing him to his end. Don Quixote begged them to leave him to
himself, as he had a wish to sleep a little. They obeyed, and he slept
at one stretch, as the saying is, more than six hours, so that the
housekeeper and niece thought he was going to sleep for ever. But at
the end of that time he woke up, and in a loud voice exclaimed,
"Blessed be Almighty God, who has shown me such goodness. In truth his
mercies are boundless, and the sins of men can neither limit them nor
keep them back!" The niece listened with attention to her uncle's
words, and they struck her as more coherent than what usually fell
from him, at least during his illness, so she asked, "What are you
saying, senor? Has anything strange occurred? What mercies or what
sins of men are you talking of?" "The mercies, niece," said Don
Quixote, "are those that God has this moment shown me, and with him,
as I said, my sins are no impediment to them. My reason is now free
and clear, rid of the dark shadows of ignorance that my unhappy
constant study of those detestable books of chivalry cast over it. Now
I see through their absurdities and deceptions, and it only grieves me
that this destruction of my illusions has come so late that it leaves
me no time to make some amends by reading other books that might be a
light to my soul. Niece, I feel myself at the point of death, and I
would fain meet it in such a way as to show that my life has not been
so ill that I should leave behind me the name of a madman; for though
I have been one, I would not that the fact should be made plainer at
my death. Call in to me, my dear, my good friends the curate, the
bachelor Samson Carrasco, and Master Nicholas the barber, for I wish
to confess and make my will." But his niece was saved the trouble by
the entrance of the three. The instant Don Quixote saw them he
exclaimed, "Good news for you, good sirs, that I am no longer Don
Quixote of La Mancha, but Alonso Quixano, whose way of life won for
him the name of Good. Now am I the enemy of Amadis of Gaul and of the
whole countless troop of his descendants; odious to me now are all the
profane stories of knight-errantry; now I perceive my folly, and the
peril into which reading them brought me; now, by God's mercy schooled
into my right senses, I loathe them." When the three heard him speak
in this way, they had no doubt whatever that some new craze had taken
possession of him; and said Samson, "What? Senor Don Quixote! Now that
we have intelligence of the lady Dulcinea being disenchanted, are you
taking this line; now, just as we are on the point of becoming
shepherds, to pass our lives singing, like princes, are you thinking
of turning hermit? Hush, for heaven's sake, be rational and let's have
no more nonsense." "All that nonsense," said Don Quixote, "that until
now has been a reality to my hurt, my death will, with heaven's help,
turn to my good. I feel, sirs, that I am rapidly drawing near death; a
truce to jesting; let me have a confessor to confess me, and a notary
to make my will; for in extremities like this, man must not trifle
with his soul; and while the curate is confessing me let some one, I
beg, go for the notary." They looked at one another, wondering at Don
Quixote's words; but, though uncertain, they were inclined to believe
him, and one of the signs by which they came to the conclusion he was
dying was this so sudden and complete return to his senses after
having been mad; for to the words already quoted he added much more,
so well expressed, so devout, and so rational, as to banish all doubt
and convince them that he was sound of mind. The curate turned them
all out, and left alone with him confessed him. The bachelor went for
the notary and returned shortly afterwards with him and with Sancho,
who, having already learned from the bachelor the condition his master
was in, and finding the housekeeper and niece weeping, began to
blubber and shed tears. The confession over, the curate came out
saying, "Alonso Quixano the Good is indeed dying, and is indeed in his
right mind; we may now go in to him while he makes his will." This
news gave a tremendous impulse to the brimming eyes of the
housekeeper, niece, and Sancho Panza his good squire, making the tears
burst from their eyes and a host of sighs from their hearts; for of a
truth, as has been said more than once, whether as plain Alonso
Quixano the Good, or as Don Quixote of La Mancha, Don Quixote was
always of a gentle disposition and kindly in all his ways, and hence
he was beloved, not only by those of his own house, but by all who
knew him. The notary came in with the rest, and as soon as the
preamble of the had been set out and Don Quixote had commended his
soul to God with all the devout formalities that are usual, coming to
the bequests, he said, "Item, it is my will that, touching certain
moneys in the hands of Sancho Panza (whom in my madness I made my
squire), inasmuch as between him and me there have been certain
accounts and debits and credits, no claim be made against him, nor any
account demanded of him in respect of them; but that if anything
remain over and above, after he has paid himself what I owe him, the
balance, which will be but little, shall be his, and much good may it
do him; and I'll stay here in the company of my lady the duchess; and
maybe when he comes back, he will find the lady Dulcinea's affair ever
so much advanced; for I mean in leisure hours, and at idle moments, to
give myself a spell of whipping without so much as a hair to cover
me." "For all that you must go if it be necessary, my good Sancho,"
said the duchess, "for they are worthy folk who ask you; and the faces
of these ladies must not remain overgrown in this way because of your
idle fears; that would be a hard case indeed." "In the king's name,
once more!" said Sancho; "If this charitable work were to be done for
the sake of damsels in confinement or charity-girls, a man might
expose himself to some hardships; but to bear it for the sake of
stripping beards off duennas! Devil take it! I'd sooner see them all
bearded, from the highest to the lowest, and from the most prudish to
the most affected." "You are very hard on duennas, Sancho my friend,"
said the duchess; "you incline very much to the opinion of the Toledo
apothecary. But indeed you are wrong; there are duennas in my house
that may serve as patterns of duennas; and here is my Dona Rodriguez,
who will not allow me to say otherwise." "Your excellence may say it
if you like," said the Rodriguez; "for God knows the truth of
everything; and whether we duennas are good or bad, bearded or smooth,
we are our mothers' daughters like other women; and as God sent us
into the world, he knows why he did, and on his mercy I rely, and not
on anybody's beard." "Well, Senora Rodriguez, Senora Trifaldi, and
present company," said Don Quixote, "I trust in Heaven that it will
look with kindly eyes upon your troubles, for Sancho will do as I bid
him. Only let Clavileno come and let me find myself face to face with
Malambruno, and I am certain no razor will shave you more easily than
my sword shall shave Malambruno's head off his shoulders; for 'God
bears with the wicked, but not for ever." "Ah!" exclaimed the
Distressed One at this, "may all the stars of the celestial regions
look down upon your greatness with benign eyes, valiant knight, and
shed every prosperity and valour upon your heart, that it may be the
shield and safeguard of the abused and downtrodden race of duennas,
detested by apothecaries, sneered at by squires, and made game of by
pages. Ill betide the jade that in the flower of her youth would not
sooner become a nun than a duenna! Unfortunate beings that we are, we
duennas! Though we may be descended in the direct male line from
Hector of Troy himself, our mistresses never fail to address us as
'you' if they think it makes queens of them. O giant Malambruno,
though thou art an enchanter, thou art true to thy promises. Send us
now the peerless Clavileno, that our misfortune may be brought to an
end; for if the hot weather sets in and these beards of ours are still
there, alas for our lot!" The Trifaldi said this in such a pathetic
way that she drew tears from the eyes of all and even Sancho's filled
up; and he resolved in his heart to accompany his master to the
uttermost ends of the earth, if so be the removal of the wool from
those venerable countenances depended upon it. CHAPTER XLI. OF THE
ARRIVAL OF CLAVILENO AND THE END OF THIS PROTRACTED ADVENTURE CHAPTER
XLII OF THE COUNSELS WHICH DON QUIXOTE GAVE SANCHO PANZA BEFORE HE SET
OUT TO GOVERN THE ISLAND, TOGETHER WITH OTHER WELL-CONSIDERED MATTERS
CHAPTER XLIII OF THE SECOND SET OF COUNSELS DON QUIXOTE GAVE SANCHO
PANZA Who, hearing the foregoing discourse of Don Quixote, would not
have set him down for a person of great good sense and greater
rectitude of purpose? But, as has been frequently observed in the
course of this great history, he only talked nonsense when he touched
on chivalry, and in discussing all other subjects showed that he had a
clear and unbiassed understanding; so that at every turn his acts gave
the lie to his intellect, and his intellect to his acts; but in the
case of these second counsels that he gave Sancho he showed himself to
have a lively turn of humour, and displayed conspicuously his wisdom,
and also his folly. Sancho listened to him with the deepest attention,
and endeavoured to fix his counsels in his memory, like one who meant
to follow them and by their means bring the full promise of his
government to a happy issue. Don Quixote, then, went on to say: "With
regard to the mode in which thou shouldst govern thy person and thy
house, Sancho, the first charge I have to give thee is to be clean,
and to cut thy nails, not letting them grow as some do, whose
ignorance makes them fancy that long nails are an ornament to their
hands, as if those excrescences they neglect to cut were nails, and
not the talons of a lizard-catching kestrel--a filthy and unnatural
abuse. "Go not ungirt and loose, Sancho; for disordered attire is a
sign of an unstable mind, unless indeed the slovenliness and slackness
is to be set down to craft, as was the common opinion in the case of
Julius Caesar. "Ascertain cautiously what thy office may be worth; and
if it will allow thee to give liveries to thy servants, give them
respectable and serviceable, rather than showy and gay ones, and
divide them between thy servants and the poor; that is to say, if thou
canst clothe six pages, clothe three and three poor men, and thus thou
wilt have pages for heaven and pages for earth; the vainglorious never
think of this new mode of giving liveries. "Eat not garlic nor onions,
lest they find out thy boorish origin by the smell; walk slowly and
speak deliberately, but not in such a way as to make a listener feel
much more pity for him than for Camilla, even though he supposed her
dead. Leonela took her up in her arms and laid her on the bed,
entreating Lothario to go in quest of some one to attend to her wound
in secret, and at the same time asking his advice and opinion as to
what they should say to Anselmo about his lady's wound if he should
chance to return before it was healed. He replied they might say what
they liked, for he was not in a state to give advice that would be of
any use; all he could tell her was to try and stanch the blood, as he
was going where he should never more be seen; and with every
appearance of deep grief and sorrow he left the house; but when he
found himself alone, and where there was nobody to see him, he crossed
himself unceasingly, lost in wonder at the adroitness of Camilla and
the consistent acting of Leonela. He reflected how convinced Anselmo
would be that he had a second Portia for a wife, and he looked forward
anxiously to meeting him in order to rejoice together over falsehood
and truth the most craftily veiled that could be imagined. Leonela, as
he told her, stanched her lady's blood, which was no more than
sufficed to support her deception; and washing the wound with a little
wine she bound it up to the best of her skill, talking all the time
she was tending her in a strain that, even if nothing else had been
said before, would have been enough to assure Anselmo that he had in
Camilla a model of purity. To Leonela's words Camilla added her own,
calling herself cowardly and wanting in spirit, since she had not
enough at the time she had most need of it to rid herself of the life
she so much loathed. She asked her attendant's advice as to whether or
not she ought to inform her beloved husband of all that had happened,
but the other bade her say nothing about it, as she would lay upon him
the obligation of taking vengeance on Lothario, which he could not do
but at great risk to himself; and it was the duty of a true wife not
to give her husband provocation to quarrel, but, on the contrary, to
remove it as far as possible from him. Camilla replied that she
believed she was right and that she would follow her advice, but at
any rate it would be well to consider how she was to explain the wound
to Anselmo, for he could not help seeing it; to which Leonela answered
that she did not know how to tell a lie even in jest. "How then can I
know, my dear?" said Camilla, "for I should not dare to forge or keep
up a falsehood if my life depended on it. If we can think of no escape
from this difficulty, it will be better to tell him the plain truth
than that he should find us out in an untrue story." "Be not uneasy,
senora," said Leonela; "between this and to-morrow I will think of
what we must say to him, and perhaps the wound being where it is it
can be hidden from his sight, and Heaven will be pleased to aid us in
a purpose so good and honourable. Compose yourself, senora, and
endeavour to calm your excitement lest my lord find you agitated; and
leave the rest to my care and God's, who always supports good
intentions." Anselmo had with the deepest attention listened to and
seen played out the tragedy of the death of his honour, which the
performers acted with such wonderfully effective truth that it seemed
as if they had become the realities of the parts they played. He
longed for night and an opportunity of escaping from the house to go
and see his good friend Lothario, and with him give vent to his joy
over the precious pearl he had gained in having established his wife's
purity. Both mistress and maid took care to give him time and
opportunity to get away, and taking advantage of it he made his
escape, and at once went in quest of Lothario, and it would be
impossible to describe how he embraced him when he found him, and the
things he said to him in the joy of his heart, and the praises he
bestowed upon Camilla; all which Lothario listened to without being
able to show any pleasure, for he could not forget how deceived his
friend was, and how dishonourably he had wronged him; and though
Anselmo could see that Lothario was not glad, still he imagined it was
only because he had left Camilla wounded and had been himself the
cause of it; and so among other things he told him not to be
distressed about Camilla's accident, for, as they had agreed to hide
it from him, the wound was evidently trifling; and that being so, he
had no cause for fear, but should henceforward be of good cheer and
rejoice with him, seeing that by his means and adroitness he found
himself raised to the greatest height of happiness that he could have
ventured to hope for, and desired no better pastime than making verses
in praise of Camilla that would preserve her name for all time to
come. Lothario commended his purpose, and promised on his own part to
aid him in raising a monument so glorious. And so Anselmo was left the
most charmingly hoodwinked man there could be in the world. He
himself, persuaded he was conducting the instrument of his glory, led
home by the hand him who had been the utter destruction of his good
name; whom Camilla received with averted countenance, though with
smiles in her heart. The deception was carried on for some time, until
at the end of a few months Fortune turned her wheel and the guilt
which had been until then so skilfully concealed was published abroad,
and Anselmo paid with his life the penalty of his ill-advised
curiosity. CHAPTER XXXV. WHICH TREATS OF THE HEROIC AND PRODIGIOUS
BATTLE DON QUIXOTE HAD WITH CERTAIN SKINS OF RED WINE, AND BRINGS THE
NOVEL OF "THE ILL-ADVISED CURIOSITY" TO A CLOSE There remained but
little more of the novel to be read, when Sancho Panza burst forth in
wild excitement from the garret where Don Quixote was lying, shouting,
"Run, sirs! quick; and help my master, who is in the thick of the
toughest and stiffest battle I ever laid eyes on. By the living God he
has given the giant, the enemy of my lady the Princess Micomicona,
such a slash that he has sliced his head clean off as if it were a
turnip." "What are you talking about, brother?" said the curate,
pausing as he was about to read the remainder of the novel. "Are you
in your senses, Sancho? How the devil can it be as you say, when the
giant is two thousand leagues away?" Here they heard a loud noise in
the chamber, and Don Quixote shouting out, "Stand, thief, brigand,
villain; now I have got thee, and thy scimitar shall not avail thee!"
And then it seemed as though he were slashing vigorously at the wall.
"Don't stop to listen," said Sancho, "but go in and part them or help
my master: though there is no need of that now, for no doubt the giant
is dead by this time and giving account to God of his past wicked
life; for I saw the blood flowing on the ground, and the head cut off
and fallen on one side, and it is as big as a large wine-skin." "May I
die," said the landlord at this, "if Don Quixote or Don Devil has not
been slashing some of the skins of red wine that stand full at his
bed's head, and the spilt wine must be what this good fellow takes for
blood;" and so saying he went into the room and the rest after him,
and there they found Don Quixote in the strangest costume in the
world. He was in his shirt, which was not long enough in front to
cover his thighs completely and was six fingers shorter behind; his
legs were very long and lean, covered with hair, and anything but
clean; on his head he had a little greasy red cap that belonged to the
host, round his left arm he had rolled the blanket of the bed, to
which Sancho, for reasons best known to himself, owed a grudge, and in
his right hand he held his unsheathed sword, with which he was
slashing about on all sides, uttering exclamations as if he were
actually fighting some giant: and the best of it was his eyes were not
open, for he was fast asleep, and dreaming that he was doing battle
with the giant. For his imagination was so wrought upon by the
adventure he was going to accomplish, that it made him dream he had
already reached the kingdom of Micomicon, and was engaged in combat
with his enemy; and believing he was laying on the giant, he had given
so many sword cuts to the skins that the whole room was full of wine.
On seeing this the landlord was so enraged that he fell on Don
Quixote, and with his clenched fist began to pummel him in such a way,
that if Cardenio and the curate had not dragged him off, he would have
brought the war of the giant to an end. But in spite of all the poor
gentleman never woke until the barber brought a great pot of cold
water from the well and flung it with one dash all over his body, on
which Don Quixote woke up, but not so completely as to understand what
was the matter. Dorothea, seeing how short and slight his attire was,
would not go in to witness the battle between her champion and her
opponent. As for Sancho, he went searching all over the floor for the
head of the giant, and not finding it he said, "I see now that it's
all enchantment in this house; for the last time, on this very spot
where I am now, I got ever so many thumps without knowing who gave
them to me, or being able to see anybody; and now this head is not to
be seen anywhere about, though I saw it cut off with my own eyes and
the blood running from the body as if from a fountain." "What blood
and fountains are you talking about, enemy of God and his saints?"
said the landlord. "Don't you see, you thief, that the blood and the
fountain are only these skins here that have been stabbed and the red
wine swimming all over the room?--and I wish I saw the soul of him
that stabbed them swimming in hell." "I know nothing about that," said
Sancho; "all I know is it will be my bad luck that through not finding
this head my county will melt away like salt in water;"--for Sancho
awake was worse than his master asleep, so much had his master's
promises addled his wits. The landlord was beside himself at the
coolness of the squire and the mischievous doings of the master, and
swore it should not be like the last time when they went without
paying; and that their privileges of chivalry should not hold good
this time to let one or other of them off without paying, even to the
cost of the plugs that would have to be put to the damaged wine-skins.
The curate was holding Don Quixote's hands, who, fancying he had now
ended the adventure and was in the presence of the Princess
Micomicona, knelt before the curate and said, "Exalted and beauteous
lady, your highness may live from this day forth fearless of any harm
this base being could do you; and I too from this day forth am
released from the promise I gave you, since by the help of God on high
and by the favour of her by whom I live and breathe, I have fulfilled
it so successfully." "Did not I say so?" said Sancho on hearing this.
"You see I wasn't drunk; there you see my master has already salted
the giant; there's no doubt about the bulls; my county is all right!"
Who could have helped laughing at the absurdities of the pair, master
and man? And laugh they did, all except the landlord, who cursed
himself; but at length the barber, Cardenio, and the curate contrived
with no small trouble to get Don Quixote on the bed, and he fell
asleep with every appearance of excessive weariness. They left him to
sleep, and came out to the gate of the inn to console Sancho Panza on
not having found the head of the giant; but much more work had they to
appease the landlord, who was furious at the sudden death of his
wine-skins; and said the landlady half scolding, half crying, "At an
evil moment and in an unlucky hour he came into my house, this
knight-errant--would that I had never set eyes on him, for dear he has
cost me; the last time he went off with the overnight score against
him for supper, bed, straw, and barley, for himself and his squire and
a hack and an ass, saying he was a knight adventurer--God send unlucky
adventures to him and all the adventurers in the world--and therefore
not bound to pay anything, for it was so settled by the
knight-errantry tariff: and then, all because of him, came the other
gentleman and carried off my tail, and gives it back more than two
cuartillos the worse, all stripped of its hair, so that it is no use
for my husband's purpose; and then, for a finishing touch to all, to
burst my wine-skins and spill my wine! I wish I saw his own blood
spilt! But let him not deceive himself, for, by the bones of my father
and the shade of my mother, they shall pay me down every quarts; or my
name is not what it is, and I am not my father's daughter." All this
and more to the same effect the landlady delivered with great
irritation, and her good maid Maritornes backed her up, while the
daughter held her peace and smiled from time to time. The curate
smoothed matters by promising to make good all losses to the best of
his power, not only as regarded the wine-skins but also the wine, and
above all the depreciation of the tail which they set such store by.
Dorothea comforted Sancho, telling him that she pledged herself, as
soon as it should appear certain that his master had decapitated the
giant, and she found herself peacefully established in her kingdom, to
bestow upon him the best county there was in it. With this Sancho
consoled himself, and assured the princess she might rely upon it that
he had seen the head of the giant, and more by token it had a beard
that reached to the girdle, and that if it was not to be seen now it
was because everything that happened in that house went by
enchantment, as he himself had proved the last time he had lodged
there. Dorothea said she fully believed it, and that he need not be
uneasy, for all would go well and turn out as he wished. All therefore
being appeased, the curate was anxious to go on with the novel, as he
saw there was but little more left to read. Dorothea and the others
begged him to finish it, and he, as he was willing to please them, and
enjoyed reading it himself, continued the tale in these words: The
result was, that from the confidence Anselmo felt in Camilla's virtue,
he lived happy and free from anxiety, and Camilla purposely looked
coldly on Lothario, that Anselmo might suppose her feelings towards
him to be the opposite of what they were; and the better to support
the position, Lothario begged to be excused from coming to the house,
as the displeasure with which Camilla regarded his presence was plain
to be seen. But the befooled Anselmo said he would on no account allow
such a thing, and so in a thousand ways he became the author of his
own dishonour, while he believed he was insuring his happiness.
Meanwhile the satisfaction with which Leonela saw herself empowered to
carry on her amour reached such a height that, regardless of
everything else, she followed her inclinations unrestrainedly, feeling
confident that her mistress would screen her, and even show her how to
manage it safely. At last one night Anselmo heard footsteps in
Leonela's room, and on trying to enter to see who it was, he found
that the door was held against him, which made him all the more
determined to open it; and exerting his strength he forced it open,
and entered the room in time to see a man leaping through the window
into the street. He ran quickly to seize him or discover who he was,
but he was unable to effect either purpose, for Leonela flung her arms
round him crying, "Be calm, senor; do not give way to passion or
follow him who has escaped from this; he belongs to me, and in fact he
is my husband." Anselmo would not believe it, but blind with rage drew
a dagger and threatened to stab Leonela, bidding her tell the truth or
he would kill her. She, in her fear, not knowing what she was saying,
exclaimed, "Do not kill me, senor, for I can tell you things more
important than any you can imagine." "Tell me then at once or thou
diest," said Anselmo. "It would be impossible for me now," said
Leonela, "I am so agitated: leave me till to-morrow, and then you
shall hear from me what will fill you with astonishment; but rest
assured that he who leaped through the window is a young man of this
city, who has given me his promise to become my husband." Anselmo was
appeased with this, and was content to wait the time she asked of him,
for he never expected to hear anything against Camilla, so satisfied
and sure of her virtue was he; and so he quitted the room, and left
Leonela locked in, telling her she should not come out until she had
told him all she had to make known to him. He went at once to see
Camilla, and tell her, as he did, all that had passed between him and
her handmaid, and the promise she had given him to inform him matters
of serious importance. There is no need of saying whether Camilla was
agitated or not, for so great was her fear and dismay, that, making
sure, as she had good reason to do, that Leonela would tell Anselmo
all she knew of her faithlessness, she had not the courage to wait and
see if her suspicions were confirmed; and that same night, as soon as
she thought that Anselmo was asleep, she packed up the most valuable
jewels she had and some money, and without being observed by anybody
escaped from the house and betook herself to Lothario's, to whom she
related what had occurred, imploring him to convey her to some place
of safety or fly with her where they might be safe from Anselmo. The
state of perplexity to which Camilla reduced Lothario was such that he
was unable to utter a word in reply to the Judge, who told the four
servants not to be uneasy, for all would be satisfactorily settled;
and then taking Don Luis by the hand, he drew him aside and asked the
reason of his having come there. But while he was questioning him they
heard a loud outcry at the gate of the inn, the cause of which was
that two of the guests who had passed the night there, seeing
everybody busy about finding out what it was the four men wanted, had
conceived the idea of going off without paying what they owed; but the
landlord, who minded his own affairs more than other people's, caught
them going out of the gate and demanded his reckoning, abusing them
for their dishonesty with such language that he drove them to reply
with their fists, and so they began to lay on him in such a style that
the poor man was forced to cry out, and call for help. The landlady
and her daughter could see no one more free to give aid than Don
Quixote, and to him the daughter said, "Sir knight, by the virtue God
has given you, help my poor father, for two wicked men are beating him
to a mummy." To which Don Quixote very deliberately and phlegmatically
replied, "Fair damsel, at the present moment your request is
inopportune, for I am debarred from involving myself in any adventure
until I have brought to a happy conclusion one to which my word has
pledged me; but that which I can do for you is what I will now
mention: run and tell your father to stand his ground as well as he
can in this battle, and on no account to allow himself to be
vanquished, while I go and request permission of the Princess
Micomicona to enable me to succour him in his distress; and if she
grants it, rest assured I will relieve him from it." "Sinner that I
am," exclaimed Maritornes, who stood by; "before you have got your
permission my master will be in the other world." "Give me leave,
senora, to obtain the permission I speak of," returned Don Quixote;
"and if I get it, it will matter very little if he is in the other
world; for I will rescue him thence in spite of all the same world can
do; or at any rate I will give you such a revenge over those who shall
have sent him there that you will be more than moderately satisfied;"
and without saying anything more he went and knelt before Dorothea,
requesting her Highness in knightly and errant phrase to be pleased to
grant him permission to aid and succour the castellan of that castle,
who now stood in grievous jeopardy. The princess granted it
graciously, and he at once, bracing his buckler on his arm and drawing
his sword, hastened to the inn-gate, where the two guests were still
handling the landlord roughly; but as soon as he reached the spot he
stopped short and stood still, though Maritornes and the landlady
asked him why he hesitated to help their master and husband. "I
hesitate," said Don Quixote, "because it is not lawful for me to draw
sword against persons of squirely condition; but call my squire Sancho
to me; for this defence and vengeance are his affair and business."
Thus matters stood at the inn-gate, where there was a very lively
exchange of fisticuffs and punches, to the sore damage of the landlord
and to the wrath of Maritornes, the landlady, and her daughter, who
were furious when they saw the pusillanimity of Don Quixote, and the
hard treatment their master, husband and father was undergoing. But
let us leave him there; for he will surely find some one to help him,
and if not, let him suffer and hold his tongue who attempts more than
his strength allows him to do; and let us go back fifty paces to see
what Don Luis said in reply to the Judge whom we left questioning him
privately as to his reasons for coming on foot and so meanly dressed.
To which the youth, pressing his hand in a way that showed his heart
was troubled by some great sorrow, and shedding a flood of tears, made
answer: "Senor, I have no more to tell you than that from the moment
when, through heaven's will and our being near neighbours, I first saw
Dona Clara, your daughter and my lady, from that instant I made her
the mistress of my will, and if yours, my true lord and father, offers
no impediment, this very day she shall become my wife. For her I left
my father's house, and for her I assumed this disguise, to follow her
whithersoever she may go, as the arrow seeks its mark or the sailor
the pole-star. She knows nothing more of my passion than what she may
have learned from having sometimes seen from a distance that my eyes
were filled with tears. You know already, senor, the wealth and noble
birth of my parents, and that I am their sole heir; if this be a
sufficient inducement for you to venture to make me completely happy,
accept me at once as your son; for if my father, influenced by other
objects of his own, should disapprove of this happiness I have sought
for myself, time has more power to alter and change things, than human
will." With this the love-smitten youth was silent, while the Judge,
after hearing him, was astonished, perplexed, and surprised, as well
at the manner and intelligence with which Don Luis had confessed the
secret of his heart, as at the position in which he found himself, not
knowing what course to take in a matter so sudden and unexpected. All
the answer, therefore, he gave him was to bid him to make his mind
easy for the present, and arrange with his servants not to take him
back that day, so that there might be time to consider what was best
for all parties. Don Luis kissed his hands by force, nay, bathed them
with his tears, in a way that would have touched a heart of marble,
not to say that of the Judge, who, as a shrewd man, had already
perceived how advantageous the marriage would be to his daughter;
though, were it possible, he would have preferred that it should be
brought about with the consent of the father of Don Luis, who he knew
looked for a title for his son. The guests had by this time made peace
with the landlord, for, by persuasion and Don Quixote's fair words
more than by threats, they had paid him what he demanded, and the
servants of Don Luis were waiting for the end of the conversation with
the Judge and their master's decision, when the devil, who never
sleeps, contrived that the barber, from whom Don Quixote had taken
Mambrino's helmet, and Sancho Panza the trappings of his ass in
exchange for those of his own, should at this instant enter the inn;
which said barber, as he led his ass to the stable, observed Sancho
Panza engaged in repairing something or other belonging to the
pack-saddle; and the moment he saw it he knew it, and made bold to
attack Sancho, exclaiming, "Ho, sir thief, I have caught you! hand
over my basin and my pack-saddle, and all my trappings that you robbed
me of." Sancho, finding himself so unexpectedly assailed, and hearing
the abuse poured upon him, seized the pack-saddle with one hand, and
with the other gave the barber a cuff that bathed his teeth in blood.
The barber, however, was not so ready to relinquish the prize he had
made in the pack-saddle; on the contrary, he raised such an outcry
that everyone in the inn came running to know what the noise and
quarrel meant. "Here, in the name of the king and justice!" he cried,
"this thief and highwayman wants to kill me for trying to recover my
property." "You lie," said Sancho, "I am no highwayman; it was in fair
war my master Don Quixote won these spoils." Don Quixote was standing
by at the time, highly pleased to see his squire's stoutness, both
offensive and defensive, and from that time forth he reckoned him a
man of mettle, and in his heart resolved to dub him a knight on the
first opportunity that presented itself, feeling sure that the order
of chivalry would be fittingly bestowed upon him. In the course of the
altercation, among other things the barber said, "Gentlemen, this
pack-saddle is mine as surely as I owe God a death, and I know it as
well as if I had given birth to it, and here is my ass in the stable
who will not let me lie; only try it, and if it does not fit him like
a glove, call me a rascal; and what is more, the same day I was robbed
of this, they robbed me likewise of a new brass basin, never yet
handselled, that would fetch a crown any day." At this Don Quixote
could not keep himself from answering; and interposing between the
two, and separating them, he placed the pack-saddle on the ground, to
lie there in sight until the truth was established, and said, "Your
worships may perceive clearly and plainly the error under which this
worthy squire lies when he calls a basin which was, is, and shall be
the helmet of Mambrino which I won from him in air war, and made
myself master of by legitimate and lawful possession. With the
pack-saddle I do not concern myself; but I may tell you on that head
that my squire Sancho asked my permission to strip off the caparison
of this vanquished poltroon's steed, and with it adorn his own; I
allowed him, and he took it; and as to its having been changed from a
caparison into a pack-saddle, I can give no explanation except the
usual one, that such transformations will take place in adventures of
chivalry. To confirm all which, run, Sancho my son, and fetch hither
the helmet which this good fellow calls a basin." "Egad, master," said
Sancho, "if we have no other proof of our case than what your worship
puts forward, Mambrino's helmet is just as much a basin as this good
fellow's caparison is a pack-saddle." "Do as I bid thee," said Don
Quixote; "it cannot be that everything in this castle goes by
enchantment." Sancho hastened to where the basin was, and brought it
back with him, and when Don Quixote saw it, he took hold of it and
said: "Your worships may see with what a face this squire can assert
that this is a basin and not the helmet I told you of; and I swear by
the order of chivalry I profess, that this helmet is the identical one
I took from him, without anything added to or taken from it." "There
is no doubt of that," said Sancho, "for from the time my master won it
until now he has only fought one battle in it, when he let loose those
unlucky men in chains; and if had not been for this basin-helmet he
would not have come off over well that time, for there was plenty of
stone-throwing in that affair." CHAPTER XLV. IN WHICH THE DOUBTFUL
QUESTION OF MAMBRINO'S HELMET AND THE PACK-SADDLE IS FINALLY SETTLED,
WITH OTHER ADVENTURES THAT OCCURRED IN TRUTH AND EARNEST "What do you
think now, gentlemen," said the barber, "of what these gentles say,
when they want to make out that this is a helmet?" "And whoever says
the contrary," said Don Quixote, "I will let him know he lies if he is
a knight, and if he is a squire that he lies again a thousand times."
Our own barber, who was present at all this, and understood Don
Quixote's humour so thoroughly, took it into his head to back up his
delusion and carry on the joke for the general amusement; so
addressing the other barber he said: "Senor barber, or whatever you
are, you must know that I belong to your profession too, and have had
a licence to practise for more than twenty years, and I know the
implements of the barber craft, every one of them, perfectly well; and
I was likewise a soldier for some time in the days of my youth, and I
know also what a helmet is, and a morion, and a headpiece with a
visor, and other things pertaining to soldiering, I meant to say to
soldiers' arms; and I say-saving better opinions and always with
submission to sounder judgments--that this piece we have now before
us, which this worthy gentleman has in his hands, not only is no
barber's basin, but is as far from being one as white is from black,
and truth from falsehood; I say, moreover, that this, although it is a
helmet, is not a complete helmet." "Certainly not," said Don Quixote,
"for half of it is wanting, that is to say the beaver." "It is quite
true," said the curate, who saw the object of his friend the barber;
and Cardenio, Don Fernando and his companions agreed with him, and
even the Judge, if his thoughts had not been so full of Don Luis's
affair, would have helped to carry on the joke; but he was so taken up
with the serious matters he had on his mind that he paid little or no
attention to these facetious proceedings. "God bless me!" exclaimed
their butt the barber at this; "is it possible that such an honourable
company can say that this is not a basin but a helmet? Why, this is a
thing that would astonish a whole university, however wise it might
be! That will do; if this basin is a helmet, why, then the pack-saddle
must be a horse's caparison, as this gentleman has said." "To me it
looks like a pack-saddle," said Don Quixote; "but I have already said
that with that question I do not concern myself." "As to whether it be
pack-saddle or caparison," said the curate, "it is only for Senor Don
Quixote to say; for in these matters of chivalry all these gentlemen
and I bow to his authority." "By God, gentlemen," said Don Quixote,
"so many strange things have happened to me in this castle on the two
occasions on which I have sojourned in it, that I will not venture to
assert anything positively in reply to any question touching anything
it contains; for it is my belief that everything that goes on within
it goes by enchantment. The first time, an enchanted Moor that there
is in it gave me sore trouble, nor did Sancho fare well among certain
followers of his; and last night I was kept hanging by this arm for
nearly two hours, without knowing how or why I came by such a mishap.
So that now, for me to come forward to give an opinion in such a
puzzling matter, would be to risk a rash decision. As regards the
assertion that this is a basin and not the helmet I told you of; and I
swear by the order of chivalry I profess, that this helmet is the
identical one I took from him, without anything added to or taken from
it." "There is no doubt of that," said Sancho, "for from the time my
master won it until now he has only fought one battle in it, when he
let loose those unlucky men in chains; and if had not been for this
basin-helmet he would not have come off over well that time, for there
was plenty of stone-throwing in that affair." CHAPTER XLV. IN WHICH
THE DOUBTFUL QUESTION OF MAMBRINO'S HELMET AND THE PACK-SADDLE IS
FINALLY SETTLED, WITH OTHER ADVENTURES THAT OCCURRED IN TRUTH AND
EARNEST "What do you think now, gentlemen," said the barber, "of what
these gentles say, when they want to make out that this is a helmet?"
"And whoever says the contrary," said Don Quixote, "I will let him
know he lies if he is a knight, and if he is a squire that he lies
again a thousand times." Our own barber, who was present at all this,
and understood Don Quixote's humour so thoroughly, took it into his
head to back up his delusion and carry on the joke for the general
amusement; so addressing the other barber he said: "Senor barber, or
whatever you are, you must know that I belong to your profession too,
and have had a licence to practise for more than twenty years, and I
know the implements of the barber craft, every one of them, perfectly
well; and I was likewise a soldier for some time in the days of my
youth, and I know also what a helmet is, and a morion, and a headpiece
with a visor, and other things pertaining to soldiering, I meant to
say to soldiers' arms; and I say-saving better opinions and always
with submission to sounder judgments--that this piece we have now
before us, which this worthy gentleman has in his hands, not only is
no barber's basin, but is as far from being one as white is from
black, and truth from falsehood; I say, moreover, that this, although
it is a helmet, is not a complete helmet." "Certainly not," said Don
Quixote, "for half of it is wanting, that is to say the beaver." "It
is quite true," said the curate, who saw the object of his friend the
barber; and Cardenio, Don Fernando and his companions agreed with him,
and even the Judge, if his thoughts had not been so full of Don Luis's
affair, would have helped to carry on the joke; but he was so taken up
with the serious matters he had on his mind that he paid little or no
attention to these facetious proceedings. "God bless me!" exclaimed
their butt the barber at this; "is it possible that such an honourable
company can say that this is not a basin but a helmet? Why, this is a
thing that would astonish a whole university, however wise it might
be! That will do; if this basin is a helmet, why, then the pack-saddle
must be a horse's caparison, as this gentleman has said." "To me it
looks like a pack-saddle," said Don Quixote; "but I have already said
that with that question I do not concern myself." "As to whether it be
pack-saddle or caparison," said the curate, "it is only for Senor Don
Quixote to say; for in these matters of chivalry all these gentlemen
and I bow to his authority." "By God, gentlemen," said Don Quixote,
"so many strange things have happened to me in this castle on the two
occasions on which I have sojourned in it, that I will not venture to
assert anything positively in reply to any question touching anything
it contains; for it is my belief that everything that goes on within
it goes by enchantment. The first time, an enchanted Moor that there
is in it gave me sore trouble, nor did Sancho fare well among certain
followers of his; and last night I was kept hanging by this arm for
nearly two hours, without knowing how or why I came by such a mishap.
So that now, for me to come forward to give an opinion in such a
puzzling matter, would be to risk a rash decision. As regards the
assertion that this is a basin and not a helmet I have already given
an answer; but as to the question whether this is a pack-saddle or a
caparison I will not venture to give a positive opinion, but will
leave it to your worships' better judgment. Perhaps as you are not
dubbed knights like myself, the enchantments of this place have
nothing to do with you, and your faculties are unfettered, and you can
see things in this castle as they really and truly are, and not as
they appear to me." "There can be no question," said Don Fernando on
this, "but that Senor Don Quixote has spoken very wisely, and that
with us rests the decision of this matter; and that we may have surer
ground to go on, I will take the votes of the gentlemen in secret, and
declare the result clearly and fully." To those who were in the secret
of Don Quixote's humour all this afforded great amusement; but to
those who knew nothing about it, it seemed the greatest nonsense in
the world, in particular to the four servants of Don Luis, as well as
to Don Luis himself, and to three other travellers who had by chance
come to the inn, and had the appearance of officers of the Holy
Brotherhood, as indeed they were; but the one who above all was at his
wits' end, was the barber basin, there before his very eyes, had been
turned into Mambrino's helmet, and whose pack-saddle he had no doubt
whatever was about to become a rich caparison for a horse. All laughed
to see Don Fernando going from one to another collecting the votes,
and whispering to them to give him their private opinion whether the
treasure over which there had been so much fighting was a pack-saddle
or a caparison; but after he had taken the votes of those who knew Don
Quixote, he said aloud, "The fact is, my good fellow, that I am tired
collecting such a number of opinions, for I find that there is not one
of whom I ask what I desire to know, who does not tell me that it is
absurd to say that this is the pack-saddle of an ass, and not the
caparison of a horse, nay, of a thoroughbred horse; so you must
submit, for, in spite of you and your ass, this is a caparison and no
pack-saddle, and you have stated and proved your case very badly."
"May I never share heaven," said the poor barber, "if your worships
are not all mistaken; and may my soul appear before God as that
appears to me a pack-saddle and not a caparison; but, 'laws go,'-I say
no more; and indeed I am not drunk, for I am fasting, except it be
from sin." The simple talk of the barber did not afford less amusement
than the absurdities of Don Quixote, who now observed: "There is no
more to be done now than for each to take what belongs to him, and to
whom God has given it, may St. Peter add his blessing." But said one
of the four servants, "Unless, indeed, this is a deliberate joke, I
cannot bring myself to believe that men so intelligent as those
present are, or seem to be, can venture to declare and assert that
this is not a basin, and that not a pack-saddle; but as I perceive
that they do assert and declare it, I can only come to the conclusion
that there is some mystery in this persistence in what is so opposed
to the evidence of experience and truth itself; for I swear by"--and
here he rapped out a round oath-"all the people in the world will not
make me believe that this is not a barber's basin and that a jackass's
pack-saddle." "It might easily be a she-ass's," observed the curate.
"It is all the same," said the servant; "that is not the point; but
whether it is or is not a pack-saddle, as your worships say." On
hearing this one of the newly arrived officers of the Brotherhood, who
had been listening to the dispute and controversy, unable to restrain
his anger and impatience, exclaimed, "It is a pack-saddle as sure as
my father is my father, and whoever has said or will say anything else
must be drunk." "You lie like a rascally clown," returned Don Quixote;
and lifting his pike, which he had never let out of his hand, he
delivered such a blow at his head that, had not the officer dodged it,
it would have stretched him at full length. The pike was shivered in
pieces against the ground, and the rest of the officers, seeing their
comrade assaulted, raised a shout, calling for help for the Holy
Brotherhood. The landlord, who was of the fraternity, ran at once to
fetch his staff of office and his sword, and ranged himself on the
side of his comrades; the servants of Don Luis clustered round him,
lest he should escape from them in the confusion; the barber, seeing
the house turned upside down, once more laid hold of his pack-saddle
and Sancho did the same; Don Quixote drew his sword and charged the
officers; Don Luis cried out to his servants to leave him alone and go
and help Don Quixote, and Cardenio and Don Fernando, who were
supporting him; the curate was shouting at the top of his voice, the
landlady was screaming, her daughter was wailing, Maritornes was
weeping, Dorothea was aghast, Luscinda terror-stricken, and Dona Clara
in a faint. The barber cudgelled Sancho, and Sancho pommelled the
barber; Don Luis gave one of his servants, who ventured to catch him
by the arm to keep him from escaping, a cuff that bathed his teeth in
blood; the Judge took his part; Don Fernando had got one of the
officers down and was belabouring him heartily; the landlord raised
his voice again calling for help for the Holy Brotherhood; so that the
whole inn was nothing but cries, shouts, shrieks, confusion, terror,
dismay, mishaps, sword-cuts, fisticuffs, cudgellings, kicks, and
bloodshed; and in the midst of all this chaos, complication, and
general entanglement, Don Quixote took it into his head that he had
been plunged into the thick of the discord of Agramante's camp; and,
in a voice that shook the inn like thunder, he cried out: "Hold all,
let all sheathe their swords, let all be calm and attend to me as they
value their lives!" All paused at his mighty voice, and he went on to
say, "Did I not tell you, sirs, that this castle was enchanted, and
that a legion or so of devils dwelt in it? In proof whereof I call
upon you to behold with your own eyes how the discord of Agramante's
camp has come hither, and been transferred into the midst of us. See
how they fight, there for the sword, here for the horse, on that side
for the eagle, on this for the helmet; we are all fighting, and all at
cross purposes. Come then, you, Senor Judge, and you, senor curate;
let the one represent King Agramante and the other King Sobrino, and
make peace among us; for by God Almighty it is a sorry business that
so many persons of quality as we are should slay one another for such
trifling cause." The officers, who did not understand Don Quixote's
mode of speaking, and found themselves roughly handled by Don
Fernando, Cardenio, and their companions, were not to be appeased; the
barber was, however, for both his beard and his pack-saddle were the
worse for the struggle; Sancho like a good servant obeyed the
slightest word of his master; while the four servants of Don Luis kept
quiet when they saw how little they gained by not being so. The
landlord alone insisted upon it that they must punish the insolence of
this madman, who at every turn raised a disturbance in the inn; but at
length the uproar was stilled for the present; the pack-saddle
remained a caparison till the day of judgment, and the basin a helmet
and the inn a castle in Don Quixote's imagination. All having been now
pacified and made friends by the persuasion of the Judge and the
curate, the servants of Don Luis began again to urge him to return
with them at once; and while he was discussing the matter with them,
the Judge took counsel with Don Fernando, Cardenio, and the curate as
to what he ought to do in the case, telling them how it stood, and
what Don Luis had said to him. It was agreed at length that Don
Fernando should tell the servants of Don Luis who he was, and that it
was his desire that Don Luis should accompany him to Andalusia, where
he would receive from the marquis his brother the welcome his quality
entitled him to; for, otherwise, it was easy to see from the
determination of Don Luis that he would not return to his father at
present, though they tore him to pieces. On learning the rank of Don
Fernando and the resolution of Don Luis the four then settled it
between themselves that three of them should return to tell his father
how matters stood, and that the other should remain to wait upon Don
Luis, and not leave him until they came back for him, or his father's
orders were known. Thus by the authority of Agramante and the wisdom
of King Sobrino all this complication of disputes was arranged; but
the enemy of concord and hater of peace, feeling himself slighted and
made a fool of, and seeing how little he had gained after having
involved them all in such an elaborate entanglement, resolved to try
his hand once more by stirring up fresh quarrels and disturbances. It
came about in this wise: the officers were pacified on learning the
rank of those with whom they had been engaged, and withdrew from the
contest, considering that whatever the result might be they were
likely to get the worst of the battle; but one of them, the one who
had been thrashed and kicked by Don Fernando, recollected that among
some warrants he carried for the arrest of certain delinquents, he had
one against Don Quixote, whom the Holy Brotherhood had ordered to be
arrested for setting the galley slaves free, as Sancho had, with very
good reason, apprehended. Suspecting how it was, then, he wished to
satisfy himself as to whether Don Quixote's features corresponded; and
taking a parchment out of his bosom he lit upon what he was in search
of, and setting himself to read it deliberately, for he was not a
quick reader, as he made out each word he fixed his eyes on Don
Quixote, and went on comparing the description in the warrant with his
face, and discovered that beyond all doubt he was the person described
in it. As soon as he had satisfied himself, folding up the parchment,
he took the warrant in his left hand and with his right seized Don
Quixote by the collar so tightly that he did not allow him to breathe,
and shouted aloud, "Help for the Holy Brotherhood! and that you may
see I demand it in earnest, read this warrant which says this
highwayman is to be arrested." The curate took the warrant and saw
that what the officer said was true, and that it agreed with Don
Quixote's appearance, who, on his part, when he found himself roughly
handled by this rascally clown, worked up to the highest pitch of
wrath, and all his joints cracking with rage, with both hands seized
the officer by the throat with all his might, so that had he not been
helped by his comrades he would have yielded up his life ere Don
Quixote released his hold. The landlord, who had perforce to support
his brother officers, ran at once to aid them. The landlady, when she
saw her husband engaged in a fresh quarrel, lifted up her voice
afresh, and its note was immediately caught up by Maritornes and her
daughter, calling upon heaven and all present for help; and Sancho,
seeing what was going on, exclaimed, "By the Lord, it is quite true
what my master says about the enchantments of this castle, for it is
impossible to live an hour in peace in it!" Don Fernando parted the
officer and Don Quixote, and to their mutual contentment made them
relax the grip by which they held, the one the coat collar, the other
the throat of his adversary; for all this, however, the officers did
not cease to demand their prisoner and call on them to help, and
deliver him over bound into their power, as was required for the
service of the King and of the Holy Brotherhood, on whose behalf they
again demanded aid and assistance to effect the capture of this robber
and footpad of the highways. Don Quixote smiled when he heard these
words, and said very calmly, "Come now, base, ill-born brood; call ye
it highway robbery to give freedom to those in bondage, to release the
captives, to succour the miserable, to raise up the fallen, to relieve
the needy? Infamous beings, who by your vile grovelling intellects
deserve that heaven should not make known to you the virtue that lies
in knight-errantry, or show you the sin and ignorance in which ye lie
when ye refuse to respect the shadow, not to say the presence, of any
knight-errant! Come now; band, not of officers, but of thieves;
footpads with the licence of the Holy Brotherhood; tell me who was the
ignoramus who signed a warrant of arrest against such a knight as I
am? Who was he that did not know that knights-errant are independent
of all jurisdictions, that their law is their sword, their charter
their prowess, and their edicts their will? Who, I say again, was the
fool that knows not that there are no letters patent of nobility that
confer such privileges or exemptions as a knight-errant acquires the
day he is dubbed a knight, and devotes himself to the arduous calling
of chivalry? What knight-errant ever paid poll-tax, duty, queen's
pin-money, king's dues, toll or ferry? What tailor ever took payment
of him for making his clothes? What castellan that received him in his
castle ever made him pay his shot? What king did not seat him at his
table? What damsel was not enamoured of him and did not yield herself
up wholly to his will and pleasure? And, lastly, what knight-errant
has there been, is there, or will there ever be in the world, not bold
enough to give, single-handed, four hundred cudgellings to four
hundred officers of the Holy Brotherhood if they come in his way?"
CHAPTER XLVI. OF THE END OF THE NOTABLE ADVENTURE OF THE OFFICERS OF
THE HOLY BROTHERHOOD; AND OF THE GREAT FEROCITY OF OUR WORTHY KNIGHT,
DON QUIXOTE While Don Quixote was talking in this strain, the curate
was endeavouring to persuade the officers that he was out of his
senses, as they might perceive by his deeds and his words, and that
they need not press the matter any further, for even if they arrested
him and carried him off, they would have to release him by-and-by as a
madman; to which the holder of the warrant replied that he had nothing
to do with inquiring into Don Quixote's madness, but only to execute
his superior's orders, and that once taken they might let him go three
hundred times if they liked. "For all that," said the curate, "you
must not take him away this time, nor will he, it is my opinion, let
himself be taken away." In short, the curate used such arguments, and
Don Quixote did such mad things, that the officers would have been
more mad than he was if they had not perceived his want of wits, and
so they thought it best to allow themselves to be pacified, and even
to act as peacemakers between the barber and Sancho Panza, who still
continued their altercation with much bitterness. In the end they, as
officers of justice, settled the question by arbitration in such a
manner that both sides were, if not perfectly contented, at least to
some extent satisfied; for they changed the pack-saddles, but not the
girths or head-stalls; and as to Mambrino's helmet, the curate, under
the rose and without Don Quixote's knowing it, paid eight reals for
the basin, and the barber executed a full receipt and engagement to
make no further demand then or thenceforth for evermore, amen. These
two disputes, which were the most important and gravest, being
settled, it only remained for the servants of Don Luis to consent that
three of them should return while one was left to accompany him
whither Don Fernando desired to take him; and good luck and better
fortune, having already begun to solve difficulties and remove
obstructions in favour of the lovers and warriors of the inn, were
pleased to persevere and bring everything to a happy issue; for the
servants agreed to do as Don Luis wished; which gave Dona Clara such
happiness that no one could have looked into her face just then
without seeing the joy of her heart. Zoraida, though she did not fully
comprehend all she saw, was grave or gay without knowing why, as she
watched and studied the various countenances, but particularly her
Spaniard's, whom she followed with her eyes and clung to with her
soul. The gift and compensation which the curate gave the barber had
not escaped the landlord's notice, and he demanded Don Quixote's
reckoning, together with the amount of the damage to his wine-skins,
and the loss of his wine, swearing that neither Rocinante nor Sancho's
ass should leave the inn until he had been paid to the very last
farthing. The curate settled all amicably, and Don Fernando paid;
though the Judge had also very readily offered to pay the score; and
all became so peaceful and quiet that the inn no longer reminded one
of the discord of Agramante's camp, as Don Quixote said, but of the
peace and tranquillity of the days of Octavianus: for all which it was
the universal opinion that their thanks were due to the great zeal and
eloquence of the curate, and to the unexampled generosity of Don
Fernando. Finding himself now clear and quit of all quarrels, his
squire's as well as his own, Don Quixote considered that it would be
advisable to continue the journey he had begun, and bring to a close
that great adventure for which he had been called and chosen; and with
this high resolve he went and knelt before Dorothea, who, however,
would not allow him to utter a word until he had risen; so to obey her
he rose, and said, "It is a common proverb, fair lady, that 'diligence
is the mother of good fortune,' and experience has often shown in
important affairs that the earnestness of the negotiator brings the
doubtful case to a successful termination; but in nothing does this
truth show itself more plainly than in war, where quickness and
activity forestall the devices of the enemy, and win the victory
before the foe has time to defend himself. All this I say, exalted and
esteemed lady, because it seems to me that for us to remain any longer
in this castle now is useless, and may be injurious to us in a way
that we shall find out some day; for who knows but that your enemy the
giant may have learned by means of secret and diligent spies that I am
going to destroy him, and if the opportunity be given him he may seize
it to fortify himself in some impregnable castle or stronghold,
against which all my efforts and the might of my indefatigable arm may
avail but little? Therefore, lady, let us, as I say, forestall his
schemes by our activity, and let us depart at once in quest of fair
fortune; for your highness is only kept from enjoying it as fully as
you could desire by my delay in encountering your adversary." Don
Quixote held his peace and said no more, calmly awaiting the reply of
the beauteous princess, who, with commanding dignity and in a style
adapted to Don Quixote's own, replied to him in these words, "I give
you thanks, sir knight, for the eagerness you, like a good knight to
whom it is a natural obligation to succour the orphan and the needy,
display to afford me aid in my sore trouble; and heaven grant that
your wishes and mine may be realised, so that you may see that there
are women in this world capable of gratitude; as to my departure, let
it be forthwith, for I have no will but yours; dispose of me entirely
in accordance with your good pleasure; for she who has once entrusted
to you the defence of her person, and placed in your hands the
recovery of her dominions, must not think of offering opposition to
that which your wisdom may ordain." "On, then, in God's name," said
Don Quixote; "for, when a lady humbles herself to me, I will not lose
the opportunity of raising her up and placing her on the throne of her
ancestors. Let us depart at once, for the common saying that in delay
there is danger, lends spurs to my eagerness to take the road; and as
neither heaven has created nor hell seen any that can daunt or
intimidate me, saddle Rocinante, Sancho, and get ready thy ass and the
queen's palfrey, and let us take leave of the castellan and these
gentlemen, and go hence this very instant." Sancho, who was standing
by all the time, said, shaking his head, "Ah! master, master, there is
more mischief in the village than one hears of, begging all good
bodies' pardon." "What mischief can there be in any village, or in all
the cities of the world, you booby, that can hurt my reputation?" said
Don Quixote. "If your worship is angry," replied Sancho, "I will hold
my tongue and leave unsaid what as a good squire I am bound to say,
and what a good servant should tell his master." "Say what thou wilt,"
returned Don Quixote, "provided thy words be not meant to work upon my
fears; for thou, if thou fearest, art behaving like thyself; but I
like myself, in not fearing." "It is nothing of the sort, as I am a
sinner before God," said Sancho, "but that I take it to be sure and
certain that this lady, who calls herself queen of the great kingdom
of Micomicon, is no more so than my mother; for, if she was what she
says, she would not go rubbing noses with one that is here every
instant and behind every door." Dorothea turned red at Sancho's words,
for the truth was that her husband Don Fernando had now and then, when
the others were not looking, gathered from her lips some of the reward
his love had earned, and Sancho seeing this had considered that such
freedom was more like a courtesan than a queen of a great kingdom;
she, however, being unable or not caring to answer him, allowed him to
proceed, and he continued, "This I say, senor, because, if after we
have travelled roads and highways, and passed bad nights and worse
days, one who is now enjoying himself in this inn is to reap the fruit
of our labours, there is no need for me to be in a hurry to saddle
Rocinante, put the pad on the ass, or get ready the palfrey; for it
will be better for us to stay quiet, and let every jade mind her
spinning, and let us go to dinner." Good God, what was the indignation
of Don Quixote when he heard the audacious words of his squire! So
great was it, that in a voice inarticulate with rage, with a
stammering tongue, and eyes that flashed living fire, he exclaimed,
"Rascally clown, boorish, insolent, and ignorant, ill-spoken,
foul-mouthed, impudent backbiter and slanderer! Hast thou dared to
utter such words in my presence and in that of these illustrious
ladies? Hast thou dared to harbour such gross and shameless thoughts
in thy muddled imagination? Begone from my presence, thou born
monster, storehouse of lies, hoard of untruths, garner of knaveries,
inventor of scandals, publisher of absurdities, enemy of the respect
due to royal personages! Begone, show thyself no more before me under
pain of my wrath;" and so saying he knitted his brows, puffed out his
cheeks, gazed around him, and stamped on the ground violently with his
right foot, showing in every way the rage that was pent up in his
heart; and at his words and furious gestures Sancho was so scared and
terrified that he would have been glad if the earth had opened that
instant and swallowed him, and his only thought was to turn round and
make his escape from the angry presence of his master. But the
ready-witted Dorothea, who by this time so well understood Don
Quixote's humour, said, to mollify his wrath, "Be not irritated at the
absurdities your good squire has uttered, Sir Knight of the Rueful
Countenance, for perhaps he did not utter them without cause, and from
his good sense and Christian conscience it is not likely that he would
bear false witness against anyone. We may therefore believe, without
any hesitation, that since, as you say, sir knight, everything in this
castle goes and is brought about by means of enchantment, Sancho, I
say, may possibly have seen, through this diabolical medium, what he
says he saw so much to the detriment of my modesty." "I swear by God
Omnipotent," exclaimed Don Quixote at this, "your highness has hit the
point; and that some vile illusion must have come before this sinner
of a Sancho, that made him see what it would have been impossible to
see by any other means than enchantments; for I know well enough, from
the poor fellow's goodness and harmlessness, that he is incapable of
bearing false witness against anybody." "True, no doubt," said Don
Fernando, "for which reason, Senor Don Quixote, you ought to forgive
him and restore him to the bosom of your favour, sicut erat in
principio, before illusions of this sort had taken away his senses."
Don Quixote said he was ready to pardon him, and the curate went for
Sancho, who came in very humbly, and falling on his knees begged for
the hand of his master, who having presented it to him and allowed him
to kiss it, gave him his blessing and said, "Now, Sancho my son, thou
wilt be convinced of the truth of what I have many a time told thee,
that everything in this castle is done by means of enchantment." "So
it is, I believe," said Sancho, "except the affair of the blanket,
which came to pass in reality by ordinary means." "Believe it not,"
said Don Quixote, "for had it been so, I would have avenged thee that
instant, or even now; but neither then nor now could I, nor have I
seen anyone upon whom to avenge thy wrong." They were all eager to
know what the affair of the blanket was, and the landlord gave them a
minute account of Sancho's flights, at which they laughed not a
little, and at which Sancho would have been no less out of countenance
had not his master once more assured him it was all enchantment. For
all that his simplicity never reached so high a pitch that he could
persuade himself it was not the plain and simple truth, without any
deception whatever about it, that he had been blanketed by beings of
flesh and blood, and not by visionary and imaginary phantoms, as his
master believed and protested. The illustrious company had now been
two days in the inn; and as it seemed to them time to depart, they
devised a plan so that, without giving Dorothea and Don Fernando the
trouble of going back with Don Quixote to his village under pretence
of restoring Queen Micomicona, the curate and the barber might carry
him away with them as they proposed, and the curate be able to take
his madness in hand at home; and in pursuance of their plan they
arranged with the owner of an oxcart who happened to be passing that
way to carry him after this fashion. They constructed a kind of cage
with wooden bars, large enough to hold Don Quixote comfortably; and
then Don Fernando and his companions, the servants of Don Luis, and
the officers of the Brotherhood, together with the landlord, by the
directions and advice of the curate, covered their faces and disguised
themselves, some in one way, some in another, so as to appear to Don
Quixote quite different from the persons he had seen in the castle.
This done, in profound silence they entered the room where he was
asleep, taking his his rest after the past frays, and advancing to
where he was sleeping tranquilly, not dreaming of anything of the kind
happening, they seized him firmly and bound him fast hand and foot, so
that, when he awoke startled, he was unable to move, and could only
marvel and wonder at the strange figures he saw before him; upon which
he at once gave way to the idea which his crazed fancy invariably
conjured up before him, and took it into his head that all these
shapes were phantoms of the enchanted castle, and that he himself was
unquestionably enchanted as he could neither move nor help himself;
precisely what the curate, the concoctor of the scheme, expected would
happen. Of all that were there Sancho was the only one who was at once
in his senses and in his own proper character, and he, though he was
within very little of sharing his master's infirmity, did not fail to
perceive who all these disguised figures were; but he did not dare to
open his lips until he saw what came of this assault and capture of
his master; nor did the latter utter a word, waiting to the upshot of
his mishap; which was that bringing in the cage, they shut him up in
it and nailed the bars so firmly that they could not be easily burst
open. They then took him on their shoulders, and as they passed out of
the room an awful voice--as much so as the barber, not he of the
pack-saddle but the other, was able to make it--was heard to say, "O
Knight of the Rueful Countenance, let not this captivity in which thou
art placed afflict thee, for this must needs be, for the more speedy
accomplishment of the adventure in which thy great heart has engaged
thee; the which shall be accomplished when the raging Manchegan lion
and the white Tobosan dove shall be linked together, having first
humbled their haughty necks to the gentle yoke of matrimony. And from
this marvellous union shall come forth to the light of the world brave
whelps that shall rival the ravening claws of their valiant father;
and this shall come to pass ere the pursuer of the flying nymph shall
in his swift natural course have twice visited the starry signs. And
thou, O most noble and obedient squire that ever bore sword at side,
beard on face, or nose to smell with, be not dismayed or grieved to
see the flower of knight-errantry carried away thus before thy very
eyes; for soon, if it so please the Framer of the universe, thou shalt
see thyself exalted to such a height that thou shalt not know thyself,
and the promises which thy good master has made thee shall not prove
false; and I assure thee, on the authority of the sage Mentironiana,
that thy wages shall be paid thee, as thou shalt see in due season.
Follow then the footsteps of the valiant enchanted knight, for it is
expedient that thou shouldst go to the destination assigned to both of
you; and as it is not permitted to me to say more, God be with thee;
for I return to that place I wot of;" and as he brought the prophecy
to a close he raised his voice to a high pitch, and then lowered it to
such a soft tone, that even those who knew it was all a joke were
almost inclined to take what they heard seriously. Don Quixote was
comforted by the prophecy he heard, for he at once comprehended its
meaning perfectly, and perceived it was promised to him that he should
see himself united in holy and lawful matrimony with his beloved
Dulcinea del Toboso, from whose blessed womb should proceed the
whelps, his sons, to the eternal glory of La Mancha; and being
thoroughly and firmly persuaded of this, he lifted up his voice, and
with a deep sigh exclaimed, "Oh thou, whoever thou art, who hast
foretold me so much good, I implore of thee that on my part thou
entreat that sage enchanter who takes charge of my interests, that he
leave me not to perish in this captivity in which they are now
carrying me away, ere I see fulfilled promises so joyful and
incomparable as those which have been now made me; for, let this but
come to pass, and I shall glory in the pains of my prison, find
comfort in these chains wherewith they bind me, and regard this bed
whereon they stretch me, not as a hard battle-field, but as a soft and
happy nuptial couch; and touching the consolation of Sancho Panza, my
squire, I rely upon his goodness and rectitude that he will not desert
me in good or evil fortune; for if, by his ill luck or mine, it may
not happen to be in my power to give him the island I have promised,
or any equivalent for it, at least his wages shall not be lost; for in
my will, which is already made, I have declared the sum that shall be
paid to him, measured, not by his many faithful services, but by the
means at my disposal." Sancho bowed his head very respectfully and
kissed both his hands, for, being tied together, he could not kiss
one; and then the apparitions lifted the cage upon their shoulders and
fixed it upon the ox-cart. CHAPTER XLVII. OF THE STRANGE MANNER IN
WHICH DON QUIXOTE OF LA MANCHA WAS CARRIED AWAY ENCHANTED, TOGETHER
WITH OTHER REMARKABLE INCIDENTS When Don Quixote saw himself caged and
hoisted on the cart in this way, he said, "Many grave histories of
knights-errant have I read; but never yet have I read, seen, or heard
of their carrying off enchanted knights-errant in this fashion, or at
the slow pace that these lazy, sluggish animals promise; for they
always take them away through the air with marvellous swiftness,
enveloped in a dark thick cloud, or on a chariot of fire, or it may be
on some hippogriff or other beast of the kind; but to carry me off
like this on an ox-cart! By God, it puzzles me! But perhaps the
chivalry and enchantments of our day take a different course from that
of those in days gone by; and it may be, too, that as I am a new
knight in the world, and the first to revive the already forgotten
calling of knight-adventurers, they may have newly invented other
kinds of enchantments and other modes of carrying off the enchanted.
What thinkest thou of the matter, Sancho my son?" "I don't know what
to think," answered Sancho, "not being as well read as your worship in
errant writings; but for all that I venture to say and swear that
these apparitions that are about us are not quite catholic."
"Catholic!" said Don Quixote. "Father of me! how can they be Catholic
when they are all devils that have taken fantastic shapes to come and
do this, and bring me to this condition? And if thou wouldst prove it,
touch them, and feel them, and thou wilt find they have only bodies of
air, and no consistency except in appearance." "By God, master,"
returned Sancho, "I have touched them already; and that devil, that
goes about there so busily, has firm flesh, and another property very
different from what I have heard say devils have, for by all accounts
they all smell of brimstone and other bad smells; but this one smells
of amber half a league off." Sancho was here speaking of Don Fernando,
who, like a gentleman of his rank, was very likely perfumed as Sancho
said. "Marvel not at that, Sancho my friend," said Don Quixote; "for
let me tell thee devils are crafty; and even if they do carry odours
about with them, they themselves have no smell, because they are
spirits; or, if they have any smell, they cannot smell of anything
sweet, but of something foul and fetid; and the reason is that as they
carry hell with them wherever they go, and can get no ease whatever
from their torments, and as a sweet smell is a thing that gives
pleasure and enjoyment, it is impossible that they can smell sweet;
if, then, this devil thou speakest of seems to thee to smell of amber,
either thou art deceiving thyself, or he wants to deceive thee by
making thee fancy he is not a devil." Such was the conversation that
passed between master and man; and Don Fernando and Cardenio,
apprehensive of Sancho's making a complete discovery of their scheme,
towards which he had already gone some way, resolved to hasten their
departure, and calling the landlord aside, they directed him to saddle
Rocinante and put the pack-saddle on Sancho's ass, which he did with
great alacrity. In the meantime the curate had made an arrangement
with the officers that they should bear them company as far as his
village, he paying them so much a day. Cardenio hung the buckler on
one side of the bow of Rocinante's saddle and the basin on the other,
and by signs commanded Sancho to mount his ass and take Rocinante's
bridle, and at each side of the cart he placed two officers with their
muskets; but before the cart was put in motion, out came the landlady
and her daughter and Maritornes to bid Don Quixote farewell,
pretending to weep with grief at his misfortune; and to them Don
Quixote said: "Weep not, good ladies, for all these mishaps are the
lot of those who follow the profession I profess; and if these
reverses did not befall me I should not esteem myself a famous
knight-errant; for such things never happen to knights of little
renown and fame, because nobody in the world thinks about them; to
valiant knights they do, for these are envied for their virtue and
valour by many princes and other knights who compass the destruction
of the worthy by base means. Nevertheless, virtue is of herself so
mighty, that, in spite of all the magic that Zoroaster its first
inventor knew, she will come victorious out of every trial, and shed
her light upon the earth as the sun does upon the heavens. Forgive me,
fair ladies, if, through inadvertence, I have in aught offended you;
for intentionally and wittingly I have never done so to any; and pray
to God that he deliver me from this captivity to which some malevolent
enchanter has consigned me; and should I find myself released
therefrom, the favours that ye have bestowed upon me in this castle
shall be held in memory by me, that I may acknowledge, recognise, and
requite them as they deserve." While this was passing between the
ladies of the castle and Don Quixote, the curate and the barber bade
farewell to Don Fernando and his companions, to the captain, his
brother, and the ladies, now all made happy, and in particular to
Dorothea and Luscinda. They all embraced one another, and promised to
let each other know how things went with them, and Don Fernando
directed the curate where to write to him, to tell him what became of
Don Quixote, assuring him that there was nothing that could give him
more pleasure than to hear of it, and that he too, on his part, would
send him word of everything he thought he would like to know, about
his marriage, Zoraida's baptism, Don Luis's affair, and Luscinda's
return to her home. The curate promised to comply with his request
carefully, and they embraced once more, and renewed their promises.
The landlord approached the curate and handed him some papers, saying
he had discovered them in the lining of the valise in which the novel
of "The Ill-advised Curiosity" had been found, and that he might take
them all away with him as their owner had not since returned; for, as
he could not read, he did not want them himself. The curate thanked
him, and opening them he saw at the beginning of the manuscript the
words, "Novel of Rinconete and Cortadillo," by which he perceived that
it was a novel, and as that of "The Ill-advised Curiosity" had been
good he concluded this would be so too, as they were both probably by
the same author; so he kept it, intending to read it when he had an
opportunity. He then mounted and his friend the barber did the same,
both masked, so as not to be recognised by Don Quixote, and set out
following in the rear of the cart. The order of march was this: first
went the cart with the owner leading it; at each side of it marched
the officers of the Brotherhood, as has been said, with their muskets;
then followed Sancho Panza on his ass, leading Rocinante by the
bridle; and behind all came the curate and the barber on their mighty
mules, with faces covered, as aforesaid, and a grave and serious air,
measuring their pace to suit the slow steps of the oxen. Don Quixote
was seated in the cage, with his hands tied and his feet stretched
out, leaning against the bars as silent and as patient as if he were a
stone statue and not a man of flesh. Thus slowly and silently they
made, it might be, two leagues, until they reached a valley which the
carter thought a convenient place for resting and feeding his oxen,
and he said so to the curate, but the barber was of opinion that they
ought to push on a little farther, as at the other side of a hill
which appeared close by he knew there was a valley that had more grass
and much better than the one where they proposed to halt; and his
advice was taken and they continued their journey. Just at that moment
the curate, looking back, saw coming on behind them six or seven
mounted men, well found and equipped, who soon overtook them, for they
were travelling, not at the sluggish, deliberate pace of oxen, but
like men who rode canons' mules, and in haste to take their noontide
rest as soon as possible at the inn which was in sight not a league
off. The quick travellers came up with the slow, and courteous
salutations were exchanged; and one of the new comers, who was, in
fact, a canon of Toledo and master of the others who accompanied him,
observing the regular order of the procession, the cart, the officers,
Sancho, Rocinante, the curate and the barber, and above all Don
Quixote caged and confined, could not help asking what was the meaning
of carrying the man in that fashion; though, from the badges of the
officers, he already concluded that he must be some desperate
highwayman or other malefactor whose punishment fell within the
jurisdiction of the Holy Brotherhood. One of the officers to whom he
had put the question, replied, "Let the gentleman himself tell you the
meaning of his going this way, senor, for we do not know." Don Quixote
overheard the conversation and said, "Haply, gentlemen, you are versed
and learned in matters of errant chivalry? Because if you are I will
tell you my misfortunes; if not, there is no good in my giving myself
the trouble of relating them;" but here the curate and the barber,
seeing that the travellers were engaged in conversation with Don
Quixote, came forward, in order to answer in such a way as to save
their stratagem from being discovered. The canon, replying to Don
Quixote, said, "In truth, brother, I know more about books of chivalry
than I do about Villalpando's elements of logic; so if that be all,
you may safely tell me what you please." "In God's name, then, senor,"
replied Don Quixote; "if that be so, I would have you know that I am
held enchanted in this cage by the envy and fraud of wicked
enchanters; for virtue is more persecuted by the wicked than loved by
the good. I am a knight-errant, and not one of those whose names Fame
has never thought of immortalising in her record, but of those who, in
defiance and in spite of envy itself, and all the magicians that
Persia, or Brahmans that India, or Gymnosophists that Ethiopia ever
produced, will place their names in the temple of immortality, to
serve as examples and patterns for ages to come, whereby
knights-errant may see the footsteps in which they must tread if they
would attain the summit and crowning point of honour in arms." "What
Senor Don Quixote of La Mancha says," observed the curate, "is the
truth; for he goes enchanted in this cart, not from any fault or sins
of his, but because of the malevolence of those to whom virtue is
odious and valour hateful. This, senor, is the Knight of the Rueful
Countenance, if you have ever heard him named, whose valiant
achievements and mighty deeds shall be written on lasting brass and
imperishable marble, notwithstanding all the efforts of envy to
obscure them and malice to hide them." When the canon heard both the
prisoner and the man who was at liberty talk in such a strain he was
ready to cross himself in his astonishment, and could not make out
what had befallen him; and all his attendants were in the same state
of amazement. At this point Sancho Panza, who had drawn near to hear
the conversation, said, in order to make everything plain, "Well,
sirs, you may like or dislike what I am going to say, but the fact of
the matter is, my master, Don Quixote, is just as much enchanted as my
mother. He is in his full senses, he eats and he drinks, and he has
his calls like other men and as he had yesterday, before they caged
him. And if that's the case, what do they mean by wanting me to
believe that he is enchanted? For I have heard many a one say that
enchanted people neither eat, nor sleep, nor talk; and my master, if
you don't stop him, will talk more than thirty lawyers." Then turning
to the curate he exclaimed, "Ah, senor curate, senor curate! do you
think I don't know you? Do you think I don't guess and see the drift
of these new enchantments? Well then, I can tell you I know you, for
all your face is covered, and I can tell you I am up to you, however
you may hide your tricks. After all, where envy reigns virtue cannot
live, and where there is niggardliness there can be no liberality. Ill
betide the devil! if it had not been for your worship my master would
be married to the Princess Micomicona this minute, and I should be a
count at least; for no less was to be expected, as well from the
goodness of my master, him of the Rueful Countenance, as from the
greatness of my services. But I see now how true it is what they say
in these parts, that the wheel of fortune turns faster than a
mill-wheel, and that those who were up yesterday are down to-day. I am
sorry for my wife and children, for when they might fairly and
reasonably expect to see their father return to them a governor or
viceroy of some island or kingdom, they will see him come back a
horse-boy. I have said all this, senor curate, only to urge your
paternity to lay to your conscience your ill-treatment of my master;
and have a care that God does not call you to account in another life
for making a prisoner of him in this way, and charge against you all
the succours and good deeds that my lord Don Quixote leaves undone
while he is shut up. "Trim those lamps there!" exclaimed the barber at
this; "so you are of the same fraternity as your master, too, Sancho?
By God, I begin to see that you will have to keep him company in the
cage, and be enchanted like him for having caught some of his humour
and chivalry. It was an evil hour when you let yourself be got with
child by his promises, and that island you long so much for found its
way into your head." "I am not with child by anyone," returned Sancho,
"nor am I a man to let myself be got with child, if it was by the King
himself. Though I am poor I am an old Christian, and I owe nothing to
nobody, and if I long for an island, other people long for worse. Each
of us is the son of his own works; and being a man I may come to be
pope, not to say governor of an island, especially as my master may
win so many that he will not know whom to give them to. Mind how you
talk, master barber; for shaving is not everything, and there is some
difference between Peter and Peter. I say this because we all know one
another, and it will not do to throw false dice with me; and as to the
enchantment of my master, God knows the truth; leave it as it is; it
only makes it worse to stir it." The squire of the Grove took Sancho
by the arm, saying to him, "Let us two go where we can talk in squire
style as much as we please, and leave these gentlemen our masters to
fight it out over the story of their loves; and, depend upon it,
daybreak will find them at it without having made an end of it." "So
be it by all means," said the man with the patch; "I'll lower the
price, and be well satisfied if I only pay my expenses; and now I'll
go back and hurry on the cart with the ape and the show;" and with
this he went out of the inn. Don Quixote at once asked the landlord
what this Master Pedro was, and what was the show and what was the ape
he had with him; which the landlord replied, "This is a famous
puppet-showman, who for some time past has been going about this
Mancha de Aragon, exhibiting a show of the release of Melisendra by
the famous Don Gaiferos, one of the best and best-represented stories
that have been seen in this part of the kingdom for many a year; he
has also with him an ape with the most extraordinary gift ever seen in
an ape or imagined in a human being; for if you ask him anything, he
listens attentively to the question, and then jumps on his master's
shoulder, and pressing close to his ear tells him the answer which
Master Pedro then delivers. He says a great deal more about things
past than about things to come; and though he does not always hit the
truth in every case, most times he is not far wrong, so that he makes
us fancy he has got the devil in him. He gets two reals for every
question if the ape answers; I mean if his master answers for him
after he has whispered into his ear; and so it is believed that this
same Master Pedro is very rich. He is a 'gallant man' as they say in
Italy, and good company, and leads the finest life in the world; talks
more than six, drinks more than a dozen, and all by his tongue, and
his ape, and his show." Master Pedro now came back, and in a cart
followed the show and the ape--a big one, without a tail and with
buttocks as bare as felt, but not vicious-looking. As soon as Don
Quixote saw him, he asked him, "Can you tell me, sir fortune-teller,
what fish do we catch, and how will it be with us? See, here are my
two reals," and he bade Sancho give them to Master Pedro; but he
answered for the ape and said, "Senor, this animal does not give any
answer or information touching things that are to come; of things past
he knows something, and more or less of things present." "Gad," said
Sancho, "I would not give a farthing to be told what's past with me,
for who knows that better than I do myself? And to pay for being told
what I know would be mighty foolish. But as you know things present,
here are my two reals, and tell me, most excellent sir ape, what is my
wife Teresa Panza doing now, and what is she diverting herself with?"
Master Pedro refused to take the money, saying, "I will not receive
payment in advance or until the service has been first rendered;" and
then with his right hand he gave a couple of slaps on his left
shoulder, and with one spring the ape perched himself upon it, and
putting his mouth to his master's ear began chattering his teeth
rapidly; and having kept this up as long as one would be saying a
credo, with another spring he brought himself to the ground, and the
same instant Master Pedro ran in great haste and fell upon his knees
before Don Quixote, and embracing his legs exclaimed, "These legs do I
embrace as I would embrace the two pillars of Hercules, O illustrious
reviver of knight-errantry, so long consigned to oblivion! O never yet
duly extolled knight, Don Quixote of La Mancha, courage of the
faint-hearted, prop of the tottering, arm of the fallen, staff and
counsel of all who are unfortunate!" Don Quixote was thunderstruck,
Sancho astounded, the cousin staggered, the page astonished, the man
from the braying town agape, the landlord in perplexity, and, in
short, everyone amazed at the words of the puppet-showman, who went on
to say, "And thou, worthy Sancho Panza, the best squire and squire to
the best knight in the world! Be of good cheer, for thy good wife
Teresa is well, and she is at this moment hackling a pound of flax;
and more by token she has at her left hand a jug with a broken spout
that holds a good drop of wine, with which she solaces herself at her
work." "That I can well believe," said Sancho. "She is a lucky one,
and if it was not for her jealousy I would not change her for the
giantess Andandona, who by my master's account was a very clever and
worthy woman; my Teresa is one of those that won't let themselves want
for anything, though their heirs may have to pay for it." "Now I
declare," said Don Quixote, "he who reads much and travels much sees
and knows a great deal. I say so because what amount of persuasion
could have persuaded me that there are apes in the world that can
divine as I have seen now with my own eyes? For I am that very Don
Quixote of La Mancha this worthy animal refers to, though he has gone
rather too far in my praise; but whatever I may be, I thank heaven
that it has endowed me with a tender and compassionate heart, always
disposed to do good to all and harm to none." "If I had money," said
the page, "I would ask senor ape what will happen me in the
peregrination I am making." To this Master Pedro, who had by this time
risen from Don Quixote's feet, replied, "I have already said that this
little beast gives no answer as to the future; but if he did, not
having money would be of no consequence, for to oblige Senor Don
Quixote, here present, I would give up all the profits in the world.
And now, because I have promised it, and to afford him pleasure, I
will set up my show and offer entertainment to all who are in the inn,
without any charge whatever." As soon as he heard this, the landlord,
delighted beyond measure, pointed out a place where the show might be
fixed, which was done at once. Don Quixote was not very well satisfied
with the divinations of the ape, as he did not think it proper that an
ape should divine anything, either past or future; so while Master
Pedro was arranging the show, he retired with Sancho into a corner of
the stable, where, without being overheard by anyone, he said to him,
"Look here, Sancho, I have been seriously thinking over this ape's
extraordinary gift, and have come to the conclusion that beyond doubt
this Master Pedro, his master, has a pact, tacit or express, with the
devil." "If the packet is express from the devil," said Sancho, "it
must be a very dirty packet no doubt; but what good can it do Master
Pedro to have such packets?" "Thou dost not understand me, Sancho,"
said Don Quixote; "I only mean he must have made some compact with the
devil to infuse this power into the ape, that he may get his living,
and after he has grown rich he will give him his soul, which is what
the enemy of mankind wants; this I am led to believe by observing that
the ape only answers about things past or present, and the devil's
knowledge extends no further; for the future he knows only by
guesswork, and that not always; for it is reserved for God alone to
know the times and the seasons, and for him there is neither past nor
future; all is present. This being as it is, it is clear that this ape
speaks by the spirit of the devil; and I am astonished they have not
denounced him to the Holy Office, and put him to the question, and
forced it out of him by whose virtue it is that he divines; because it
is certain this ape is not an astrologer; neither his master nor he
sets up, or knows how to set up, those figures they call judiciary,
which are now so common in Spain that there is not a jade, or page, or
old cobbler, that will not undertake to set up a figure as readily as
pick up a knave of cards from the ground, bringing to nought the
marvellous truth of the science by their lies and ignorance. I know of
a lady who asked one of these figure schemers whether her little
lap-dog would be in pup and would breed, and how many and of what
colour the little pups would be. To which senor astrologer, after
having set up his figure, made answer that the bitch would be in pup,
and would drop three pups, one green, another bright red, and the
third parti-coloured, provided she conceived between eleven and twelve
either of the day or night, and on a Monday or Saturday; but as things
turned out, two days after this the bitch died of a surfeit, and senor
planet-ruler had the credit all over the place of being a most
profound astrologer, as most of these planet-rulers have." "Still,"
said Sancho, "I would be glad if your worship would make Master Pedro
ask his ape whether what happened your worship in the cave of
Montesinos is true; for, begging your worship's pardon, I, for my
part, take it to have been all flam and lies, or at any rate something
you dreamt." "That may be," replied Don Quixote; "however, I will do
what you suggest; though I have my own scruples about it." At this
point Master Pedro came up in quest of Don Quixote, to tell him the
show was now ready and to come and see it, for it was worth seeing.
Don Quixote explained his wish, and begged him to ask his ape at once
to tell him whether certain things which had happened to him in the
cave of Montesinos were dreams or realities, for to him they appeared
to partake of both. Upon this Master Pedro, without answering, went
back to fetch the ape, and, having placed it in front of Don Quixote
and Sancho, said: "See here, senor ape, this gentleman wishes to know
whether certain things which happened to him in the cave called the
cave of Montesinos were false or true." On his making the usual sign
the ape mounted on his left shoulder and seemed to whisper in his ear,
and Master Pedro said at once, "The ape says that the things you saw
or that happened to you in that cave are, part of them false, part
true; and that he only knows this and no more as regards this
question; but if your worship wishes to know more, on Friday next he
will answer all that may be asked him, for his virtue is at present
exhausted, and will not return to him till Friday, as he has said."
"Did I not say, senor," said Sancho, "that I could not bring myself to
believe that all your worship said about the adventures in the cave
was true, or even the half of it?" "The course of events will tell,
Sancho," replied Don Quixote; "time, that discloses all things, leaves
nothing that it does not drag into the light of day, though it be
buried in the bosom of the earth. But enough of that for the present;
let us go and see Master Pedro's show, for I am sure there must be
something novel in it." "Something!" said Master Pedro; "this show of
mine has sixty thousand novel things in it; let me tell you, Senor Don
Quixote, it is one of the best-worth-seeing things in the world this
day; but operibus credite et non verbis, and now let's get to work,
for it is growing late, and we have a great deal to do and to say and
show." Don Quixote and Sancho obeyed him and went to where the show
was already put up and uncovered, set all around with lighted wax
tapers which made it look splendid and bright. When they came to it
Master Pedro ensconced himself inside it, for it was he who had to
work the puppets, and a boy, a servant of his, posted himself outside
to act as showman and explain the mysteries of the exhibition, having
a wand in his hand to point to the figures as they came out. And so,
all who were in the inn being arranged in front of the show, some of
them standing, and Don Quixote, Sancho, the page, and cousin,
accommodated with the best places, the interpreter began to say what
he will hear or see who reads or hears the next chapter. CHAPTER XXVI.
WHEREIN IS CONTINUED THE DROLL ADVENTURE OF THE PUPPET-SHOWMAN,
TOGETHER WITH OTHER THINGS IN TRUTH RIGHT GOOD All were silent,
Tyrians and Trojans; I mean all who were watching the show were
hanging on the lips of the interpreter of its wonders, when drums and
trumpets were heard to sound inside it and cannon to go off. The noise
was soon over, and then the boy lifted up his voice and said, "This
true story which is here represented to your worships is taken word
for word from the French chronicles and from the Spanish ballads that
are in everybody's mouth, and in the mouth of the boys about the
streets. Its subject is the release by Senor Don Gaiferos of his wife
Melisendra, when a captive in Spain at the hands of the Moors in the
city of Sansuena, for so they called then what is now called
Saragossa; and there you may see how Don Gaiferos is playing at the
tables, just as they sing it-- At tables playing Don Gaiferos sits,
For Melisendra is forgotten now. And that personage who appears there
with a crown on his head and a sceptre in his hand is the Emperor
Charlemagne, the supposed father of Melisendra, who, angered to see
his son-in-law's inaction and unconcern, comes in to chide him; and
observe with what vehemence and energy he chides him, so that you
would fancy he was going to give him half a dozen raps with his
sceptre; and indeed there are authors who say he did give them, and
sound ones too; and after having said a great deal to him about
imperilling his honour by not effecting the release of his wife, he
said, so the tale runs, Enough I've said, see to it now. Observe, too,
how the emperor turns away, and leaves Don Gaiferos fuming; and you
see now how in a burst of anger, he flings the table and the board far
from him and calls in haste for his armour, and asks his cousin Don
Roland for the loan of his sword, Durindana, and how Don Roland
refuses to lend it, offering him his company in the difficult
enterprise he is undertaking; but he, in his valour and anger, will
not accept it, and says that he alone will suffice to rescue his wife,
even though she were imprisoned deep in the centre of the earth, and
with this he retires to arm himself and set out on his journey at
once. Now let your worships turn your eyes to that tower that appears
there, which is supposed to be one of the towers of the alcazar of
Saragossa, now called the Aljaferia; that lady who appears on that
balcony dressed in Moorish fashion is the peerless Melisendra, for
many a time she used to gaze from thence upon the road to France, and
seek consolation in her captivity by thinking of Paris and her
husband. Observe, too, a new incident which now occurs, such as,
perhaps, never was seen. Do you not see that Moor, who silently and
stealthily, with his finger on his lip, approaches Melisendra from
behind? Observe now how he prints a kiss upon her lips, and what a
hurry she is in to spit, and wipe them with the white sleeve of her
smock, and how she bewails herself, and tears her fair hair as though
it were to blame for the wrong. Observe, too, that the stately Moor
who is in that corridor is King Marsilio of Sansuena, who, having seen
the Moor's insolence, at once orders him (though his kinsman and a
great favourite of his) to be seized and given two hundred lashes,
while carried through the streets of the city according to custom,
with criers going before him and officers of justice behind; and here
you see them come out to execute the sentence, although the offence
has been scarcely committed; for among the Moors there are no
indictments nor remands as with us." Here Don Quixote called out,
"Child, child, go straight on with your story, and don't run into
curves and slants, for to establish a fact clearly there is need of a
great deal of proof and confirmation;" and said Master Pedro from
within, "Boy, stick to your text and do as the gentleman bids you;
it's the best plan; keep to your plain song, and don't attempt
harmonies, for they are apt to break down from being over fine." "I
will," said the boy, and he went on to say, "This figure that you see
here on horseback, covered with a Gascon cloak, is Don Gaiferos
himself, whom his wife, now avenged of the insult of the amorous Moor,
and taking her stand on the balcony of the tower with a calmer and
more tranquil countenance, has perceived without recognising him; and
she addresses her husband, supposing him to be some traveller, and
holds with him all that conversation and colloquy in the ballad that
runs-- If you, sir knight, to France are bound, Oh! for Gaiferos ask--
which I do not repeat here because prolixity begets disgust; suffice
it to observe how Don Gaiferos discovers himself, and that by her
joyful gestures Melisendra shows us she has recognised him; and what
is more, we now see she lowers herself from the balcony to place
herself on the haunches of her good husband's horse. But ah! unhappy
lady, the edge of her petticoat has caught on one of the bars of the
balcony and she is left hanging in the air, unable to reach the
ground. But you see how compassionate heaven sends aid in our sorest
need; Don Gaiferos advances, and without minding whether the rich
petticoat is torn or not, he seizes her and by force brings her to the
ground, and then with one jerk places her on the haunches of his
horse, astraddle like a man, and bids her hold on tight and clasp her
arms round his neck, crossing them on his breast so as not to fall,
for the lady Melisendra was not used to that style of riding. You see,
too, how the neighing of the horse shows his satisfaction with the
gallant and beautiful burden he bears in his lord and lady. You see
how they wheel round and quit the city, and in joy and gladness take
the road to Paris. Go in peace, O peerless pair of true lovers! May
you reach your longed-for fatherland in safety, and may fortune
interpose no impediment to your prosperous journey; may the eyes of
your friends and kinsmen behold you enjoying in peace and tranquillity
the remaining days of your life--and that they may be as many as those
of Nestor!" Here Master Pedro called out again and said, "Simplicity,
boy! None of your high flights; all affectation is bad." The
interpreter made no answer, but went on to say, "There was no want of
idle eyes, that see everything, to see Melisendra come down and mount,
and word was brought to King Marsilio, who at once gave orders to
sound the alarm; and see what a stir there is, and how the city is
drowned with the sound of the bells pealing in the towers of all the
mosques." "Nay, nay," said Don Quixote at this; "on that point of the
bells Master Pedro is very inaccurate, for bells are not in use among
the Moors; only kettledrums, and a kind of small trumpet somewhat like
our clarion; to ring bells this way in Sansuena is unquestionably a
great absurdity." On hearing this, Master Pedro stopped ringing, and
said, "Don't look into trifles, Senor Don Quixote, or want to have
things up to a pitch of perfection that is out of reach. Are there not
almost every day a thousand comedies represented all round us full of
thousands of inaccuracies and absurdities, and, for all that, they
have a successful run, and are listened to not only with applause, but
with admiration and all the rest of it? Go on, boy, and don't mind;
for so long as I fill my pouch, no matter if I show as many
inaccuracies as there are motes in a sunbeam." "True enough," said Don
Quixote; and the boy went on: "See what a numerous and glittering
crowd of horsemen issues from the city in pursuit of the two faithful
lovers, what a blowing of trumpets there is, what sounding of horns,
what beating of drums and tabors; I fear me they will overtake them
and bring them back tied to the tail of their own horse, which would
be a dreadful sight." Don Quixote, however, seeing such a swarm of
Moors and hearing such a din, thought it would be right to aid the
fugitives, and standing up he exclaimed in a loud voice, "Never, while
I live, will I permit foul play to be practised in my presence on such
a famous knight and fearless lover as Don Gaiferos. Halt! ill-born
rabble, follow him not nor pursue him, or ye will have to reckon with
me in battle!" and suiting the action to the word, he drew his sword,
and with one bound placed himself close to the show, and with
unexampled rapidity and fury began to shower down blows on the puppet
troop of Moors, knocking over some, decapitating others, maiming this
one and demolishing that; and among many more he delivered one down
stroke which, if Master Pedro had not ducked, made himself small, and
got out of the way, would have sliced off his head as easily as if it
had been made of almond-paste. Master Pedro kept shouting, "Hold hard!
Senor Don Quixote! can't you see they're not real Moors you're
knocking down and killing and destroying, but only little pasteboard
figures! Look--sinner that I am!--how you're wrecking and ruining all
that I'm worth!" But in spite of this, Don Quixote did not leave off
discharging a continuous rain of cuts, slashes, downstrokes, and
backstrokes, and at length, in less than the space of two credos, he
brought the whole show to the ground, with all its fittings and
figures shivered and knocked to pieces, King Marsilio badly wounded,
and the Emperor Charlemagne with his crown and head split in two. The
whole audience was thrown into confusion, the ape fled to the roof of
the inn, the cousin was frightened, and even Sancho Panza himself was
in mighty fear, for, as he swore after the storm was over, he had
never seen his master in such a furious passion. The complete
destruction of the show being thus accomplished, Don Quixote became a
little calmer, said, "I wish I had here before me now all those who do
not or will not believe how useful knights-errant are in the world;
just think, if I had not been here present, what would have become of
the brave Don Gaiferos and the fair Melisendra! Depend upon it, by
this time those dogs would have overtaken them and inflicted some
outrage upon them. So, then, long live knight-errantry beyond
everything living on earth this day!" "Let it live, and welcome," said
Master Pedro at this in a feeble voice, "and let me die, for I am so
unfortunate that I can say with King Don Rodrigo-- Yesterday was I
lord of Spain To-day I've not a turret left That I may call mine own.
Not half an hour, nay, barely a minute ago, I saw myself lord of kings
and emperors, with my stables filled with countless horses, and my
trunks and bags with gay dresses unnumbered; and now I find myself
ruined and laid low, destitute and a beggar, and above all without my
ape, for, by my faith, my teeth will have to sweat for it before I
have him caught; and all through the reckless fury of sir knight here,
who, they say, protects the fatherless, and rights wrongs, and does
other charitable deeds; but whose generous intentions have been found
wanting in my case only, blessed and praised be the highest heavens!
Verily, knight of the rueful figure he must be to have disfigured
mine." Sancho Panza was touched by Master Pedro's words, and said to
him, "Don't weep and lament, Master Pedro; you break my heart; let me
tell you my master, Don Quixote, is so catholic and scrupulous a
Christian that, if he can make out that he has done you any wrong, he
will own it, and be willing to pay for it and make it good, and
something over and above." "Only let Senor Don Quixote pay me for some
part of the work he has destroyed," said Master Pedro, "and I would be
content, and his worship would ease his conscience, for he cannot be
saved who keeps what is another's against the owner's will, and makes
no restitution." "That is true," said Don Quixote; "but at present I
am not aware that I have got anything of yours, Master Pedro." "What!"
returned Master Pedro; "and these relics lying here on the bare hard
ground--what scattered and shattered them but the invincible strength
of that mighty arm? And whose were the bodies they belonged to but
mine? And what did I get my living by but by them?" "Now am I fully
convinced," said Don Quixote, "of what I had many a time before
believed; that the enchanters who persecute me do nothing more than
put figures like these before my eyes, and then change and turn them
into what they please. In truth and earnest, I assure you gentlemen
who now hear me, that to me everything that has taken place here
seemed to take place literally, that Melisendra was Melisendra, Don
Gaiferos Don Gaiferos, Marsilio Marsilio, and Charlemagne Charlemagne.
That was why my anger was roused; and to be faithful to my calling as
a knight-errant I sought to give aid and protection to those who fled,
and with this good intention I did what you have seen. If the result
has been the opposite of what I intended, it is no fault of mine, but
of those wicked beings that persecute me; but, for all that, I am
willing to condemn myself in costs for this error of mine, though it
did not proceed from malice; let Master Pedro see what he wants for
the spoiled figures, for I agree to pay it at once in good and current
money of Castile." Master Pedro made him a bow, saying, "I expected no
less of the rare Christianity of the valiant Don Quixote of La Mancha,
and the other Sancho his squire, of whom he knew already from having
read their history. The gay shepherd offered him his services and
begged that he would accompany him to their tents, and Don Quixote had
to give way and comply. And now the gave was started, and the nets
were filled with a variety of birds that deceived by the colour fell
into the danger they were flying from. Upwards of thirty persons, all
gaily attired as shepherds and shepherdesses, assembled on the spot,
and were at once informed who Don Quixote and his squire were, whereat
they were not a little delighted, as they knew of him already through
his history. They repaired to the tents, where they found tables laid
out, and choicely, plentifully, and neatly furnished. They treated Don
Quixote as a person of distinction, giving him the place of honour,
and all observed him, and were full of astonishment at the spectacle.
At last the cloth being removed, Don Quixote with great composure
lifted up his voice and said: "One of the greatest sins that men are
guilty of is--some will say pride--but I say ingratitude, going by the
common saying that hell is full of ingrates. This sin, so far as it
has lain in my power, I have endeavoured to avoid ever since I have
enjoyed the faculty of reason; and if I am unable to requite good
deeds that have been done me by other deeds, I substitute the desire
to do so; and if that be not enough I make them known publicly; for he
who declares and makes known the good deeds done to him would repay
them by others if it were in his power, and for the most part those
who receive are the inferiors of those who give. Thus, God is superior
to all because he is the supreme giver, and the offerings of man fall
short by an infinite distance of being a full return for the gifts of
God; but gratitude in some degree makes up for this deficiency and
shortcoming. I therefore, grateful for the favour that has been
extended to me here, and unable to make a return in the same measure,
restricted as I am by the narrow limits of my power, offer what I can
and what I have to offer in my own way; and so I declare that for two
full days I will maintain in the middle of this highway leading to
Saragossa, that these ladies disguised as shepherdesses, who are here
present, are the fairest and most courteous maidens in the world,
excepting only the peerless Dulcinea del Toboso, sole mistress of my
thoughts, be it said without offence to those who hear me, ladies and
gentlemen." On hearing this Sancho, who had been listening with great
attention, cried out in a loud voice, "Is it possible there is anyone
in the world who will dare to say and swear that this master of mine
is a madman fit to be tied, and for that matter, I too, am not behind
him; for I'm a greater fool than he is when I follow him and serve
him, if there's any truth in the proverb that says, 'Tell me what
company thou keepest, and I'll tell thee what thou art,' or in that
other, 'Not with whom thou art bred, but with whom thou art fed,' and
of those, 'Who leans against a good tree, a good shade covers him;' I
have leant upon a good master, and I have been for months going about
with him, and please God I shall be just such another; long life to
him and long life to me, for neither will he be in any want of empires
to rule, or I of islands to govern." "No, Sancho my friend, certainly
not," said the duke, "for in the name of Senor Don Quixote I confer
upon you the government of one of no small importance that I have at
my disposal." "Go down on thy knees, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "and
kiss the feet of his excellence for the favour he has bestowed upon
thee." Sancho obeyed, and on seeing this the ecclesiastic stood up
from table completely out of temper, exclaiming, "By the gown I wear,
I am almost inclined to say that your excellence is as great a fool as
these sinners. No wonder they are mad, when people who are in their
senses sanction their madness! I leave your excellence with them, for
so long as they are in the house, I will remain in my own, and spare
myself the trouble of reproving what I cannot remedy;" and without
uttering another word, or eating another morsel, he went off, the
entreaties of the duke and duchess being entirely unavailing to stop
him; not that the duke said much to him, for he could not, because of
the laughter his uncalled-for anger provoked. When he had done
laughing, he said to Don Quixote, "You have replied on your own behalf
so stoutly, Sir Knight of the Lions, that there is no occasion to seek
further satisfaction for this, which, though it may look like an
offence, is not so at all, for, as women can give no offence, no more
can ecclesiastics, as you very well know." "That is true," said Don
Quixote, "and Andres must have patience until my return as you say,
senora; but I once more swear and promise not to stop until I have
seen him avenged and paid." "I have no faith in those oaths," said
Andres; "I would rather have now something to help me to get to
Seville than all the revenges in the world; if you have here anything
to eat that I can take with me, give it me, and God be with your
worship and all knights-errant; and may their errands turn out as well
for themselves as they have for me." Sancho took out from his store a
piece of bread and another of cheese, and giving them to the lad he
said, "Here, take this, brother Andres, for we have all of us a share
in your misfortune." "Why, what share have you got?" "This share of
bread and cheese I am giving you," answered Sancho; "and God knows
whether I shall feel the want of it myself or not; for I would have
you know, friend, that we squires to knights-errant have to bear a
great deal of hunger and hard fortune, and even other things more
easily felt than told." Andres seized his bread and cheese, and seeing
that nobody gave him anything more, bent his head, and took hold of
the road, as the saying is. However, before leaving he said, "For the
love of God, sir knight-errant, if you ever meet me again, though you
may see them cutting me to pieces, give me no aid or succour, but
leave me to my misfortune, which will not be so great but that a
greater will come to me by being helped by your worship, on whom and
all the knights-errant that have ever been born God send his curse."
Don Quixote was getting up to chastise him, but he took to his heels
at such a pace that no one attempted to follow him; and mightily
chapfallen was Don Quixote at Andres' story, and the others had to
take great care to restrain their laughter so as not to put him
entirely out of countenance. CHAPTER XXXII. WHICH TREATS OF WHAT
BEFELL DON QUIXOTE'S PARTY AT THE INN Their dainty repast being
finished, they saddled at once, and without any adventure worth
mentioning they reached next day the inn, the object of Sancho Panza's
fear and dread; but though he would have rather not entered it, there
was no help for it. The landlady, the landlord, their daughter, and
Maritornes, when they saw Don Quixote and Sancho coming, went out to
welcome them with signs of hearty satisfaction, which Don Quixote
received with dignity and gravity, and bade them make up a better bed
for him than the last time: to which the landlady replied that if he
paid better than he did the last time she would give him one fit for a
prince. Don Quixote said he would, so they made up a tolerable one for
him in the same garret as before; and he lay down at once, being
sorely shaken and in want of sleep. No sooner was the door shut upon
him than the landlady made at the barber, and seizing him by the
beard, said: "By my faith you are not going to make a beard of my tail
any longer; you must give me back tail, for it is a shame the way that
thing of my husband's goes tossing about on the floor; I mean the comb
that I used to stick in my good tail." But for all she tugged at it
the barber would not give it up until the licentiate told him to let
her have it, as there was now no further occasion for that stratagem,
because he might declare himself and appear in his own character, and
tell Don Quixote that he had fled to this inn when those thieves the
galley slaves robbed him; and should he ask for the princess's squire,
they could tell him that she had sent him on before her to give notice
to the people of her kingdom that she was coming, and bringing with
her the deliverer of them all. On this the barber cheerfully restored
the tail to the landlady, and at the same time they returned all the
accessories they had borrowed to effect Don Quixote's deliverance. All
the people of the inn were struck with astonishment at the beauty of
Dorothea, and even at the comely figure of the shepherd Cardenio. The
curate made them get ready such fare as there was in the inn, and the
landlord, in hope of better payment, served them up a tolerably good
dinner. All this time Don Quixote was asleep, and they thought it best
not to waken him, as sleeping would now do him more good than eating.
While at dinner, the company consisting of the landlord, his wife,
their daughter, Maritornes, and all the travellers, they discussed the
strange craze of Don Quixote and the manner in which he had been
found; and the landlady told them what had taken place between him and
the carrier; and then, looking round to see if Sancho was there, when
she saw he was not, she gave them the whole story of his blanketing,
which they received with no little amusement. But on the curate
observing that it was the books of chivalry which Don Quixote had read
that had turned his brain, the landlord said: "I cannot understand how
that can be, for in truth to my mind there is no better reading in the
world, and I have here two or three of them, with other writings that
are the very life, not only of myself but of plenty more; for when it
is harvest-time, the reapers flock here on holidays, and there is
always one among them who can read and who takes up one of these
books, and we gather round him, thirty or more of us, and stay
listening to him with a delight that makes our grey hairs grow young
again. At least I can say for myself that when I hear of what furious
and terrible blows the knights deliver, I am seized with the longing
to do the same, and I would like to be hearing about them night and
day." "And I just as much," said the landlady, "because I never have a
quiet moment in my house except when you are listening to some one
reading; for then you are so taken up that for the time being you
forget to scold." "That is true," said Maritornes; "and, faith, I
relish hearing these things greatly too, for they are very pretty;
especially when they describe some lady or another in the arms of her
knight under the orange trees, and the duenna who is keeping watch for
them half dead with envy and fright; all this I say is as good as
honey." "And you, what do you think, young lady?" said the curate
turning to the landlord's daughter. "I don't know indeed, senor," said
she; "I listen too, and to tell the truth, though I do not understand
it, I like hearing it; but it is not the blows that my father likes
that I like, but the laments the knights utter when they are separated
from their ladies; and indeed they sometimes make me weep with the
pity I feel for them." "Then you would console them if it was for you
they wept, young lady?" said Dorothea. "I don't know what I should
do," said the girl; "I only know that there are some of those ladies
so cruel that they call their knights tigers and lions and a thousand
other foul names: and Jesus! I don't know what sort of folk they can
be, so unfeeling and heartless, that rather than bestow a glance upon
a worthy man they leave him to die or go mad. I don't know what is the
good of such prudery; if it is for honour's sake, why not marry them?
That's all they want." "Hush, child," said the landlady; "it seems to
me thou knowest a great deal about these things, and it is not fit for
girls to know or talk so much." "As the gentleman asked me, I could
not help answering him," said the girl. "Well then," said the curate,
"bring me these books, senor landlord, for I should like to see them."
"With all my heart," said he, and going into his own room he brought
out an old valise secured with a little chain, on opening which the
curate found in it three large books and some manuscripts written in a
very good hand. The first that he opened he found to be "Don
Cirongilio of Thrace," and the second "Don Felixmarte of Hircania,"
and the other the "History of the Great Captain Gonzalo Hernandez de
Cordova, with the Life of Diego Garcia de Paredes." When the curate
read the two first titles he looked over at the barber and said, "We
want my friend's housekeeper and niece here now." "Nay," said the
barber, "I can do just as well to carry them to the yard or to the
hearth, and there is a very good fire there." "What! your worship
would burn my books!" said the landlord. "Only these two," said the
curate, "Don Cirongilio, and Felixmarte." "Are my books, then,
heretics or phlegmaties that you want to burn them?" said the
landlord. "Schismatics you mean, friend," said the barber, "not
phlegmatics." "That's it," said the landlord; "but if you want to burn
any, let it be that about the Great Captain and that Diego Garcia; for
I would rather have a child of mine burnt than either of the others."
"Brother," said the curate, "those two books are made up of lies, and
are full of folly and nonsense; but this of the Great Captain is a
true history, and contains the deeds of Gonzalo Hernandez of Cordova,
who by his many and great achievements earned the title all over the
world of the Great Captain, a famous and illustrious name, and
deserved by him alone; and this Diego Garcia de Paredes was a
distinguished knight of the city of Trujillo in Estremadura, a most
gallant soldier, and of such bodily strength that with one finger he
stopped a mill-wheel in full motion; and posted with a two-handed
sword at the foot of a bridge he kept the whole of an immense army
from passing over it, and achieved such other exploits that if,
instead of his relating them himself with the modesty of a knight and
of one writing his own history, some free and unbiassed writer had
recorded them, they would have thrown into the shade all the deeds of
the Hectors, Achilleses, and Rolands." "Tell that to my father," said
the landlord. "There's a thing to be astonished at! Stopping a
mill-wheel! By God your worship should read what I have read of
Felixmarte of Hircania, how with one single backstroke he cleft five
giants asunder through the middle as if they had been made of
bean-pods like the little friars the children make; and another time
he attacked a very great and powerful army, in which there were more
than a million six hundred thousand soldiers, all armed from head to
foot, and he routed them all as if they had been flocks of sheep. "And
then, what do you say to the good Cirongilio of Thrace, that was so
stout and bold; as may be seen in the book, where it is related that
as he was sailing along a river there came up out of the midst of the
water against him a fiery serpent, and he, as soon as he saw it, flung
himself upon it and got astride of its scaly shoulders, and squeezed
its throat with both hands with such force that the serpent, finding
he was throttling it, had nothing for it but to let itself sink to the
bottom of the river, carrying with it the knight who would not let go
his hold; and when they got down there he found himself among palaces
and gardens so pretty that it was a wonder to see; and then the
serpent changed itself into an old ancient man, who told him such
things as were never heard. Hold your peace, senor; for if you were to
hear this you would go mad with delight. A couple of figs for your
Great Captain and your Diego Garcia!" Hearing this Dorothea said in a
whisper to Cardenio, "Our landlord is almost fit to play a second part
to Don Quixote." "I think so," said Cardenio, "for, as he shows, he
accepts it as a certainty that everything those books relate took
place exactly as it is written down; and the barefooted friars
themselves would not persuade him to the contrary." "But consider,
brother," said the curate once more, "there never was any Felixmarte
of Hircania in the world, nor any Cirongilio of Thrace, or any of the
other knights of the same sort, that the books of chivalry talk of;
the whole thing is the fabrication and invention of idle wits, devised
by them for the purpose you describe of beguiling the time, as your
reapers do when they read; for I swear to you in all seriousness there
never were any such knights in the world, and no such exploits or
nonsense ever happened anywhere." "Try that bone on another dog," said
the landlord; "as if I did not know how many make five, and where my
shoe pinches me; don't think to feed me with pap, for by God I am no
fool. It is a good joke for your worship to try and persuade me that
everything these good books say is nonsense and lies, and they printed
by the license of the Lords of the Royal Council, as if they were
people who would allow such a lot of lies to be printed all together,
and so many battles and enchantments that they take away one's
senses." "I have told you, friend," said the curate, "that this is
done to divert our idle thoughts; and as in well-ordered states games
of chess, fives, and billiards are allowed for the diversion of those
who do not care, or are not obliged, or are unable to work, so books
of this kind are allowed to be printed, on the supposition that, what
indeed is the truth, there can be nobody so ignorant as to take any of
them for true stories; and if it were permitted me now, and the
present company desired it, I could say something about the qualities
books of chivalry should possess to be good ones, that would be to the
advantage and even to the taste of some; but I hope the time will come
when I can communicate my ideas to some one who may be able to mend
matters; and in the meantime, senor landlord, believe what I have
said, and take your books, and make up your mind about their truth or
falsehood, and much good may they do you; and God grant you may not
fall lame of the same foot your guest Don Quixote halts on." "No fear
of that," returned the landlord; "I shall not be so mad as to make a
knight-errant of myself; for I see well enough that things are not now
as they used to be in those days, when they say those famous knights
roamed about the world." Sancho had made his appearance in the middle
of this conversation, and he was very much troubled and cast down by
what he heard said about knights-errant being now no longer in vogue,
and all books of chivalry being folly and lies; and he resolved in his
heart to wait and see what came of this journey of his master's, and
if it did not turn out as happily as his master expected, he
determined to leave him and go back to his wife and children and his
ordinary labour. The landlord was carrying away the valise and the
books, but the curate said to him, "Wait; I want to see what those
papers are that are written in such a good hand." The landlord taking
them out handed them to him to read, and he perceived they were a work
of about eight sheets of manuscript, with, in large letters at the
beginning, the title of "Novel of the Ill-advised Curiosity." The
curate read three or four lines to himself, and said, "I must say the
title of this novel does not seem to me a bad one, and three days
hence thou wilt depart, for I wish thee to observe in the meantime
what I do and say for her sake, that thou mayest be able to tell it."
"But what more have I to see besides what I have seen?" said Sancho.
"Much thou knowest about it!" said Don Quixote. "I have now got to
tear up my garments, to scatter about my armour, knock my head against
these rocks, and more of the same sort of thing, which thou must
witness." "For the love of God," said Sancho, "be careful, your
worship, how you give yourself those knocks on the head, for you may
come across such a rock, and in such a way, that the very first may
put an end to the whole contrivance of this penance; and I should
think, if indeed knocks on the head seem necessary to you, and this
business cannot be done without them, you might be content--as the
whole thing is feigned, and counterfeit, and in joke--you might be
content, I say, with giving them to yourself in the water, or against
something soft, like cotton; and leave it all to me; for I'll tell my
lady that your worship knocked your head against a point of rock
harder than a diamond." "I thank thee for thy good intentions, friend
Sancho," answered Don Quixote, "but I would have thee know that all
these things I am doing are not in joke, but very much in earnest, for
anything else would be a transgression of the ordinances of chivalry,
which forbid us to tell any lie whatever under the penalties due to
apostasy; and to do one thing instead of another is just the same as
lying; so my knocks on the head must be real, solid, and valid,
without anything sophisticated or fanciful about them, and it will be
needful to leave me some lint to dress my wounds, since fortune has
compelled us to do without the balsam we lost." "It was worse losing
the ass," replied Sancho, "for with him lint and all were lost; but I
beg of your worship not to remind me again of that accursed liquor,
for my soul, not to say my stomach, turns at hearing the very name of
it; and I beg of you, too, to reckon as past the three days you
allowed me for seeing the mad things you do, for I take them as seen
already and pronounced upon, and I will tell wonderful stories to my
lady; so write the letter and send me off at once, for I long to
return and take your worship out of this purgatory that seems to be
hell but is not, as there is hope of getting out of it; which, as I
have said, those in hell have not, and I believe your worship will not
say anything to the contrary." "That is true," said he of the Rueful
Countenance, "but how shall we manage to write the letter?" "And the
ass-colt order too," added Sancho. "All shall be included," said Don
Quixote; "and as there is no paper, it would be well done to write it
on the leaves of trees, as the ancients did, or on tablets of wax;
though that would be as hard to find just now as paper. But it has
just occurred to me how it may be conveniently and even more than
conveniently written, and that is in the note-book that belonged to
Cardenio, and thou wilt take care to have it copied on paper, in a
good hand, at the first village thou comest to where there is a
schoolmaster, or if not, any sacristan will copy it; but see thou give
it not to any notary to copy, for they write a law hand that Satan
could not make out." "But what is to be done about the signature?"
said Sancho. "The letters of Amadis were never signed," said Don
Quixote. "That is all very well," said Sancho, "but the order must
needs be signed, and if it is copied they will say the signature is
false, and I shall be left without ass-colts." "The order shall go
signed in the same book," said Don Quixote, "and on seeing it my niece
will make no difficulty about obeying it; as to the loveletter thou
canst put by way of signature, 'Yours till death, the Knight of the
Rueful Countenance.' And it will be no great matter if it is in some
other person's hand, for as well as I recollect Dulcinea can neither
read nor write, nor in the whole course of her life has she seen
handwriting or letter of mine, for my love and hers have been always
platonic, not going beyond a modest look, and even that so seldom that
I can safely swear I have not seen her four times in all these twelve
years I have been loving her more than the light of these eyes that
the earth will one day devour; and perhaps even of those four times
she has not once perceived that I was looking at her: such is the
retirement and seclusion in which her father Lorenzo Corchuelo and her
mother Aldonza Nogales have brought her up." "So, so!" said Sancho;
"Lorenzo Corchuelo's daughter is the lady Dulcinea del Toboso,
otherwise called Aldonza Lorenzo?" "She it is," said Don Quixote, "and
she it is that is worthy to be lady of the whole universe." "I know
her well," said Sancho, "and let me tell you she can fling a crowbar
as well as the lustiest lad in all the town. Giver of all good! but
she is a brave lass, and a right and stout one, and fit to be helpmate
to any knight-errant that is or is to be, who may make her his lady:
the whoreson wench, what sting she has and what a voice! I can tell
you one day she posted herself on the top of the belfry of the village
to call some labourers of theirs that were in a ploughed field of her
father's, and though they were better than half a league off they
heard her as well as if they were at the foot of the tower; and the
best of her is that she is not a bit prudish, for she has plenty of
affability, and jokes with everybody, and has a grin and a jest for
everything. So, Sir Knight of the Rueful Countenance, I say you not
only may and ought to do mad freaks for her sake, but you have a good
right to give way to despair and hang yourself; and no one who knows
of it but will say you did well, though the devil should take you; and
I wish I were on my road already, simply to see her, for it is many a
day since I saw her, and she must be altered by this time, for going
about the fields always, and the sun and the air spoil women's looks
greatly. But I must own the truth to your worship, Senor Don Quixote;
until now I have been under a great mistake, for I believed truly and
honestly that the lady Dulcinea must be some princess your worship was
in love with, or some person great enough to deserve the rich presents
you have sent her, such as the Biscayan and the galley slaves, and
many more no doubt, for your worship must have won many victories in
the time when I was not yet your squire. But all things considered,
what good can it do the lady Aldonza Lorenzo, I mean the lady Dulcinea
del Toboso, nor took Don Quixote's letter to her, for it was left in
the memorandum book in the Sierra Morena, how did he dare to invent
the answer and all that about finding her sifting wheat, the whole
story being a deception and falsehood, and so much to the prejudice of
the peerless Dulcinea's good name, a thing that is not at all becoming
the character and fidelity of a good squire?" At these words, Sancho,
without uttering one in reply, got up from his chair, and with
noiseless steps, with his body bent and his finger on his lips, went
all round the room lifting up the hangings; and this done, he came
back to his seat and said, "Now, senora, that I have seen that there
is no one except the bystanders listening to us on the sly, I will
answer what you have asked me, and all you may ask me, without fear or
dread. And the first thing I have got to say is, that for my own part
I hold my master Don Quixote to be stark mad, though sometimes he says
things that, to my mind, and indeed everybody's that listens to him,
are so wise, and run in such a straight furrow, that Satan himself
could not have said them better; but for all that, really, and beyond
all question, it's my firm belief he is cracked. Well, then, as this
is clear to my mind, I can venture to make him believe things that
have neither head nor tail, like that affair of the answer to the
letter, and that other of six or eight days ago, which is not yet in
history, that is to say, the affair of the enchantment of my lady
Dulcinea; for I made him believe she is enchanted, though there's no
more truth in it than over the hills of Ubeda." The duchess begged him
to tell her about the enchantment or deception, so Sancho told the
whole story exactly as it had happened, and his hearers were not a
little amused by it; and then resuming, the duchess said, "In
consequence of what worthy Sancho has told me, a doubt starts up in my
mind, and there comes a kind of whisper to my ear that says, 'If Don
Quixote be mad, crazy, and cracked, and Sancho Panza his squire knows
it, and, notwithstanding, serves and follows him, and goes trusting to
his empty promises, there can be no doubt he must be still madder and
sillier than his master; and that being so, it will be cast in your
teeth, senora duchess, if you give the said Sancho an island to
govern; for how will he who does not know how to govern himself know
how to govern others?'" "By God, senora," said Sancho, "but that doubt
comes timely; but your grace may say it out, and speak plainly, or as
you like; for I know what you say is true, and if I were wise I should
have left my master long ago; but this was my fate, this was my bad
luck; I can't help it, I must follow him; we're from the same village,
I've eaten his bread, I'm fond of him, I'm grateful, he gave me his
ass-colts, and above all I'm faithful; so it's quite impossible for
anything to separate us, except the pickaxe and shovel. And if your
highness does not like to give me the government you promised, God
made me without it, and maybe your not giving it to me will be all the
better for my conscience, for fool as I am I know the proverb 'to her
hurt the ant got wings,' and it may be that Sancho the squire will get
to heaven sooner than Sancho the governor. 'They make as good bread
here as in France,' and 'by night all cats are grey,' and 'a hard case
enough his, who hasn't broken his fast at two in the afternoon,' and
'there's no stomach a hand's breadth bigger than another,' and the
same can be filled 'with straw or hay,' as the saying is, and 'the
little birds of the field have God for their purveyor and caterer,'
and 'four yards of Cuenca frieze keep one warmer than four of Segovia
broad-cloth,' and 'when we quit this world and are put underground the
prince travels by as narrow a path as the journeyman,' and 'the Pope's
body does not take up more feet of earth than the sacristan's,' for
all that the one is higher than the other; for when we go to our
graves we all pack ourselves up and make ourselves small, or rather
they pack us up and make us small in spite of us, and then--good night
to us. And I say once more, if your ladyship does not like to give me
the government you promised, God made me without it, and maybe your
not giving it to me will be all the better for my conscience, for fool
as I am I know the proverb 'to her hurt the ant got wings,' and it may
be that Sancho the squire will get to heaven sooner than Sancho the
governor. 'They make as good bread here as in France,' and 'by night
all cats are grey,' and 'a hard case enough his, who hasn't broken his
fast at two in the afternoon,' and 'there's no stomach a hand's
breadth bigger than another,' and the same can be filled 'with straw
or hay,' as the saying is, and 'the little birds of the field have God
for their purveyor and caterer,' and 'four yards of Cuenca frieze keep
one warmer than four of Segovia broad-cloth,' and 'when we quit this
world and are put underground the prince travels by as narrow a path
as the journeyman,' and 'the Pope's body does not take up more feet of
earth than the sacristan's,' for all that the one is higher than the
other; for when we go to our graves we all pack ourselves up and make
ourselves small, or rather they pack us up and make us small in spite
of us, and then--good night to us. And I say once more, if your
ladyship does not like to give me the island because I'm a fool, like
a wise man I will take care to give myself no trouble about it; I have
heard say that 'behind the cross there's the devil,' and that 'all
that glitters is not gold,' and that from among the oxen, and the
ploughs, and the yokes, Wamba the husbandman was taken to be made King
of Spain, and from among brocades, and pleasures, and riches, Roderick
was taken to be devoured by adders, if the verses of the old ballads
don't lie." "To be sure they don't lie!" exclaimed Dona Rodriguez, the
duenna, who was one of the listeners. "Why, there's a ballad that says
they put King Rodrigo alive into a tomb full of toads, and adders, and
lizards, and that two days afterwards the king, in a plaintive, feeble
voice, cried out from within the tomb-- They gnaw me now, they gnaw me
now, There where I most did sin. And according to that the gentleman
has good reason to say he would rather be a labouring man than a king,
if vermin are to eat him." The duchess could not help laughing at the
simplicity of her duenna, or wondering at the language and proverbs of
Sancho, to whom she said, "Worthy Sancho knows very well that when
once a knight has made a promise he strives to keep it, though it
should cost him his life. But now Don Fernando's friends, as well as
the curate and the barber, who had been present all the while, not
forgetting the worthy Sancho Panza, ran forward and gathered round Don
Fernando, entreating him to have regard for the tears of Dorothea, and
not suffer her reasonable hopes to be disappointed, since, as they
firmly believed, what she said was but the truth; and bidding him
observe that it was not, as it might seem, by accident, but by a
special disposition of Providence that they had all met in a place
where no one could have expected a meeting. And the curate bade him
remember that only death could part Luscinda from Cardenio; that even
if some sword were to separate them they would think their death most
happy; and that in a case that admitted of no remedy his wisest course
was, by conquering and putting a constraint upon himself, to show a
generous mind, and of his own accord suffer these two to enjoy the
happiness Heaven had granted them. He bade him, too, turn his eyes
upon the beauty of Dorothea and he would see that few if any could
equal much less excel her; while to that beauty should be added her
modesty and the surpassing love she bore him. But besides all this, he
reminded him that if he prided himself on being a gentleman and a
Christian, he could not do otherwise than keep his plighted word; and
that in doing so he would obey God and meet the approval of all
sensible people, who know and recognised it to be the privilege of
beauty, even in one of humble birth, provided virtue accompany it, to
be able to raise itself to the level of any rank, without any slur
upon him who places it upon an equality with himself; and furthermore
that when the potent sway of passion asserts itself, so long as there
be no mixture of sin in it, he is not to be blamed who gives way to
it. To be brief, they added to these such other forcible arguments
that Don Fernando's manly heart, being after all nourished by noble
blood, was touched, and yielded to the truth which, even had he wished
it, he could not gainsay; and he showed his submission, and acceptance
of the good advice that had been offered to him, by stooping down and
embracing Dorothea, saying to her, "Rise, dear lady, it is not right
that what I hold in my heart should be kneeling at my feet; and if
until now I have shown no sign of what I own, it may have been by
Heaven's decree in order that, seeing the constancy with which you
love me, I may learn to value you as you deserve. What I entreat of
you is that you reproach me not with my transgression and grievous
wrong-doing; for the same cause and force that drove me to make you
mine impelled me to struggle against being yours; and to prove this,
turn and look at the eyes of the now happy Luscinda, and you will see
in them an excuse for all my errors: and as she has found and gained
the object of her desires, and I have found in you what satisfies all
my wishes, may she live in peace and contentment as many happy years
with her Cardenio, as on my knees I pray Heaven to allow me to live
with my Dorothea;" and with these words he once more embraced her and
pressed his face to hers with so much tenderness that he had to take
great heed to keep his tears from completing the proof of his love and
repentance in the sight of all. Not so Luscinda, and Cardenio, and
almost all the others, for they shed so many tears, some in their own
happiness, some at that of the others, that one would have supposed a
heavy calamity had fallen upon them all. Even Sancho Panza was
weeping; though afterwards he said he only wept because he saw that
Dorothea was not as he fancied the queen Micomicona, of whom he
expected such great favours. Their wonder as well as their weeping
lasted some time, and then Cardenio and Luscinda went and fell on
their knees before Don Fernando, returning him thanks for the favour
he had rendered them in language so grateful that he knew not how to
answer them, and raising them up embraced them with every mark of
affection and courtesy. He then asked Dorothea how she had managed to
reach a place so far removed from her own home, and she in a few
fitting words told all that she had previously related to Cardenio,
with which Don Fernando and his companions were so delighted that they
wished the story had been longer; so charmingly did Dorothea describe
her misadventures. When she had finished Don Fernando recounted what
had befallen him in the city after he had found in Luscinda's bosom
the paper in which she declared that she was Cardenio's wife, and
never could be his. He said he meant to kill her, and would have done
so had not Sancho interposed with his smartness; for he, seeing his
master pause, took the lead, saying, "My lord Don Quixote of La
Mancha, who once was called the Knight of the Rueful Countenance, but
now is called the Knight of the Lions, is a gentleman of great
discretion who knows Latin and his mother tongue like a bachelor, and
in everything that he deals with or advises proceeds like a good
soldier, and has all the laws and ordinances of what they call combat
at his fingers' ends; so you have nothing to do but to let yourselves
be guided by what he says, and on my head be it if it is wrong.
Besides which, you have been told that it is folly to take offence at
merely hearing a bray. I remember when I was a boy I brayed as often
as I had a fancy, without anyone hindering me, and so elegantly and
naturally that when I brayed all the asses in the town would bray; but
I was none the less for that the son of my parents who were greatly
respected; and though I was envied because of the gift by more than
one of the high and mighty ones of the town, I did not care two
farthings for it; and that you may see I am telling the truth, wait a
bit and listen, for this art, like swimming, once learnt is never
forgotten;" and then, taking hold of his nose, he began to bray so
vigorously that all the valleys around rang again. One of those,
however, that stood near him, fancying he was mocking them, lifted up
a long staff he had in his hand and smote him such a blow with it that
Sancho dropped helpless to the ground. Don Quixote, seeing him so
roughly handled, attacked the man who had struck him lance in hand,
but so many thrust themselves between them that he could not avenge
him. Far from it, finding a shower of stones rained upon him, and
crossbows and muskets unnumbered levelled at him, he wheeled Rocinante
round and, as fast as his best gallop could take him, fled from the
midst of them, commending himself to God with all his heart to deliver
him out of this peril, in dread every step of some ball coming in at
his back and coming out at his breast, and every minute drawing his
breath to see whether it had gone from him. The members of the band,
however, were satisfied with seeing him take to flight, and did not
fire on him. They put up Sancho, scarcely restored to his senses, on
his ass, and let him go after his master; not that he was sufficiently
in his wits to guide the beast, but Dapple followed the footsteps of
Rocinante, from whom he could not remain a moment separated. Don
Quixote having got some way off looked back, and seeing Sancho coming,
waited for him, as he perceived that no one followed him. The men of
the troop stood their ground till night, and as the enemy did not come
out to battle, they returned to their town exulting; and had they been
aware of the ancient custom of the Greeks, they would have erected a
trophy on the spot. CHAPTER XXVIII. OF MATTERS THAT BENENGELI SAYS HE
WHO READS THEM WILL KNOW, IF HE READS THEM WITH ATTENTION When the
brave man flees, treachery is manifest and it is for wise men to
reserve themselves for better occasions. This proved to be the case
with Don Quixote, who, giving way before the fury of the townsfolk and
the hostile intentions of the angry troop, took to flight and, without
a thought of Sancho or the danger in which he was leaving him,
retreated to such a distance as he thought made him safe. Sancho,
lying across his ass, followed him, as has been said, and at length
came up, having by this time recovered his senses, and on joining him
let himself drop off Dapple at Rocinante's feet, sore, bruised, and
belaboured. Don Quixote dismounted to examine his wounds, but finding
him whole from head to foot, he said to him, angrily enough, "In an
evil hour didst thou take to braying, Sancho! Where hast thou learned
that it is well done to mention the rope in the house of the man that
has been hanged? To the music of brays what harmonies couldst thou
expect to get but cudgels? Give thanks to God, Sancho, that they
signed the cross on thee just now with a stick, and did not mark thee
per signum crucis with a cutlass." "I'm not equal to answering," said
Sancho, "for I feel as if I was speaking through my shoulders; let us
mount and get away from this; I'll keep from braying, but not from
saying that knights-errant fly and leave their good squires to be
pounded like privet, or made meal of at the hands of their enemies."
"He does not fly who retires," returned Don Quixote; "for I would have
thee know, Sancho, that there are two kinds of lineages in the world;
some there be tracing and deriving their descent from kings and
princes, whom time has reduced little by little until they end in a
point like a pyramid upside down; and others who spring from the
common herd and go on rising step by step until they come to be great
lords; so that the difference is that the one were what they no longer
are, and the others are what they formerly were not. And I may be of
such that after investigation my origin may prove great and famous,
with which the king, my father-in-law that is to be, ought to be
satisfied; and should he not be, the princess will so love me that
even though she well knew me to be the son of a water-carrier, she
will take me for her lord and husband in spite of her father; if not,
then it comes to seizing her and carrying her off where I please; for
time or death will put an end to the wrath of her parents." "It comes
to this, too," said Sancho, "what some naughty people say, 'Never ask
as a favour what thou canst take by force;' though it would fit better
to say, 'A clear escape is better than good men's prayers.' I say so
because if my lord the king, your worship's father-in-law, will not
condescend to give you my lady the princess, there is nothing for it
but, as your worship says, to seize her and transport her. But the
mischief is that until peace is made and you come into the peaceful
enjoyment of your kingdom, the poor squire is famishing as far as
rewards go, unless it be that the confidante damsel that is to be his
wife comes with the princess, and that with her he tides over his bad
luck until Heaven otherwise orders things; for his master, I suppose,
may as well give her to him at once for a lawful wife." "Nobody can
object to that," said Don Quixote. "Then since that may be," said
Sancho, "there is nothing for it but to commend ourselves to God, and
let fortune take what course it will." "God guide it according to my
wishes and thy wants," said Don Quixote, "and mean be he who thinks
himself mean." "In God's name let him be so," said Sancho: "I am an
old Christian, and to fit me for a count that's enough." "And more
than enough for thee," said Don Quixote; "and even wert thou not, it
would make no difference, because I being the king can easily give
thee nobility without purchase or service rendered by thee, for when I
make thee a count, then thou art at once a gentleman; and they may say
what they will, but by my faith they will have to call thee 'your
lordship,' whether they like it or not." "Not a doubt of it; and I'll
know how to support the tittle," said Sancho. "Title thou shouldst
say, not tittle," said his master. "So be it," answered Sancho. "I say
I will know how to behave, for once in my life I was beadle of a
brotherhood, and the beadle's gown sat so well on me that all said I
looked as if I was to be steward of the same brotherhood. What will it
be, then, when I put a duke's robe on my back, or dress myself in gold
and pearls like a count? I believe they'll come a hundred leagues to
see me." "Thou wilt look well," said Don Quixote, "but thou must shave
thy beard often, for thou hast it so thick and rough and unkempt, that
if thou dost not shave it every second day at least, they will see
what thou art at the distance of a musket shot." "What more will it
be," said Sancho, "than having a barber, and keeping him at wages in
the house? and even if it be necessary, I will make him go behind me
like a nobleman's equerry." "Why, how dost thou know that noblemen
have equerries behind them?" asked Don Quixote. "I will tell you,"
answered Sancho. "Years ago I was for a month at the capital and there
I saw taking the air a very small gentleman who they said was a very
great man, and a man following him on horseback in every turn he took,
just as if he was his tail. I asked why this man did not join the
other man, instead of always going behind him; they answered me that
he was his equerry, and that it was the custom with nobles to have
such persons behind them, and ever since then I know it, for I have
never forgotten it." "Thou art right," said Don Quixote, "and I cannot
guess or explain what this may mean; but stay; let us see if in this
memorandum book there is anything written by which we may be able to
trace out or discover what we want to know." He opened it, and the
first thing he found in it, written roughly but in a very good hand,
was a sonnet, and reading it aloud that Sancho might hear it, he found
that it ran as follows: SONNET Or Love is lacking in intelligence, Or
to the height of cruelty attains, Or else it is my doom to suffer
pains Beyond the measure due to my offence. But if Love be a God, it
follows thence That he knows all, and certain it remains No God loves
cruelty; then who ordains This penance that enthrals while it
torments? It were a falsehood, Chloe, thee to name; Such evil with
such goodness cannot live; And against Heaven I dare not charge the
blame, I only know it is my fate to die. To him who knows not whence
his malady A miracle alone a cure can give. "There is nothing to be
learned from that rhyme," said Sancho, "unless by that clue there's in
it, one may draw out the ball of the whole matter." "What clue is
there?" said Don Quixote. "I thought your worship spoke of a clue in
it," said Sancho. "I only said Chloe," replied Don Quixote; "and that
no doubt, is the name of the lady of whom the author of the sonnet
complains; and, faith, he must be a tolerable poet, or I know little
of the craft." "Then your worship understands rhyming too?" "And
better than thou thinkest," replied Don Quixote, "as thou shalt see
when thou carriest a letter written in verse from beginning to end to
my lady Dulcinea del Toboso, for I would have thee know, Sancho, if
thou knowest it not, that with lovers the outward actions and motions
they give way to when their loves are in question are the faithful
messengers that carry the news of what is going on in the depths of
their hearts. Go, my friend, may better fortune than mine attend thee,
and bring thee a happier issue than that which I await in dread in
this dreary solitude." "I will go and return quickly," said Sancho;
"cheer up that little heart of yours, master mine, for at the present
moment you seem to have got one no bigger than a hazel nut; remember
what they say, that a stout heart breaks bad luck, and that where
there are no fletches there are no pegs; and moreover they say, the
hare jumps up where it's not looked for. I say this because, if we
could not find my lady's palaces or castles to-night, now that it is
daylight I count upon finding them when I least expect it, and once
found, leave it to me to manage her." "Verily, Sancho," said Don
Quixote, "thou dost always bring in thy proverbs happily, whatever we
deal with; may God give me better luck in what I am anxious about."
With this, Sancho wheeled about and gave Dapple the stick, and Don
Quixote remained behind, seated on his horse, resting in his stirrups
and leaning on the end of his lance, filled with sad and troubled
forebodings; and there we will leave him, and accompany Sancho, who
went off no less serious and troubled than he left his master; so much
so, that as soon as he had got out of the thicket, and looking round
saw that Don Quixote was not within sight, he dismounted from his ass,
and seating himself at the foot of a tree began to commune with
himself, saying, "Now, brother Sancho, let us know where your worship
is going. Are you going to look for some ass that has been lost? Not
at all. Then what are you going to look for? I am going to look for a
princess, that's all; and in her for the sun of beauty and the whole
heaven at once. And where do you expect to find all this, Sancho?
Where? Why, in the great city of El Toboso. Well, and for whom are you
going to look for her? For the famous knight Don Quixote of La Mancha,
who has commanded me to present myself before your Grace, that your
Highness dispose of me at your pleasure'?" Oh, how our good gentleman
enjoyed the delivery of this speech, especially when he had thought of
some one to call his Lady! There was, so the story goes, in a village
near his own a very good-looking farm-girl with whom he had been at
one time in love, though, so far as is known, she never knew it nor
gave a thought to the matter. Her name was Aldonza Lorenzo, and upon
her he thought fit to confer the title of Lady of his Thoughts; and
after some search for a name which should not be out of harmony with
her own, and should suggest and indicate that of a princess and great
lady, he decided upon calling her Dulcinea del Toboso--she being of El
Toboso--a name, to his mind, musical, uncommon, and significant, like
all those he had already bestowed upon himself and the things
belonging to him. CHAPTER II. WHICH TREATS OF THE FIRST SALLY THE
INGENIOUS DON QUIXOTE MADE FROM HOME These preliminaries settled, he
did not care to put off any longer the execution of his design, urged
on to it by the thought of all the world was losing by his delay,
seeing what wrongs he intended to right, grievances to redress,
injustices to repair, abuses to remove, and duties to discharge. So,
without giving notice of his intention to anyone, and without anybody
seeing him, one morning before the dawning of the day (which was one
of the hottest of the month of July) he donned his suit of armour,
mounted Rocinante with his patched-up helmet on, braced his buckler,
took his lance, and by the back door of the yard sallied forth upon
the plain in the highest contentment and satisfaction at seeing with
what ease he had made a beginning with his grand purpose. But scarcely
did he find himself upon the open plain, when a terrible thought
struck him, one all but enough to make him abandon the enterprise at
the very outset. It occurred to him that he had not been dubbed a
knight, for it was plain to him he could not lawfully engage in any
adventure without receiving the order of knighthood. CHAPTER III.
WHEREIN IS RELATED THE DROLL WAY IN WHICH DON QUIXOTE HAD HIMSELF
DUBBED A KNIGHT Harassed by this reflection, he made haste with his
scanty pothouse supper, and having finished it called the landlord,
and shutting himself into the stable with him, fell on his knees
before him, saying, "From this spot I rise not, valiant knight, until
your courtesy grants me the boon I seek, one that will redound to your
praise and the benefit of the human race." The landlord, seeing his
guest at his feet and hearing a speech of this kind, stood staring at
him in bewilderment, not knowing what to do or say, and entreating him
to rise, but all to no purpose until he had agreed to grant the boon
demanded of him. "I looked for no less, my lord, from your High
Magnificence," replied Don Quixote, "and I have to tell you that the
boon I have asked and your liberality has granted is that you shall
dub me knight to-morrow morning, and that to-night I shall watch my
arms in the chapel of this your castle; thus tomorrow, as I have said,
will be accomplished what I so much desire, enabling me lawfully to
roam through all the four quarters of the world seeking adventures on
behalf of those in distress, as is the duty of chivalry and of
knights-errant like myself, whose ambition is directed to such deeds."
The landlord, who, as has been mentioned, was something of a wag, and
had already some suspicion of his guest's want of wits, was quite
convinced of it on hearing talk of this kind from him, and to make
sport for the night he determined to fall in with his humour. So he
told him he was quite right in all he had said in favour of arms, and
that he himself, though a man of letters and a graduate, was of the
same opinion. They finished their supper, the cloth was removed, and
while the hostess, her daughter, and Maritornes were getting Don
Quixote of La Mancha's garret ready, in which it was arranged that the
women were to be quartered by themselves for the night, Don Fernando
begged the captive to tell them the story of his life, for it could
not fail to be strange and interesting, to judge by the hints he had
let fall on his arrival in company with Zoraida. To this the captive
replied that he would very willingly yield to his request, only he
feared his tale would not give them as much pleasure as he wished;
nevertheless, not to be wanting in compliance, he would tell it. The
curate and the others thanked him and added their entreaties, and he
finding himself so pressed said there was no occasion ask, where a
command had such weight, and added, "If your worships will give me
your attention you will hear a true story which, perhaps, fictitious
ones constructed with ingenious and studied art cannot come up to."
These words made them settle themselves in their places and preserve a
deep silence, and he seeing them waiting on his words in mute
expectation, began thus in a pleasant quiet voice. CHAPTER XXXIX.
WHEREIN THE CAPTIVE RELATES HIS LIFE AND ADVENTURES My family had its
origin in a village in the mountains of Leon, and nature had been
kinder and more generous to it than fortune; though in the general
poverty of those communities my father passed for being even a rich
man; and he would have been so in reality had he been as clever in
preserving his property as he was in spending it. This tendency of his
to be liberal and profuse he had acquired from having been a soldier
in his youth, for the soldier's life is a school in which the niggard
becomes free-handed and the free-handed prodigal; and if any soldiers
are to be found who are misers, they are monsters of rare occurrence.
My father went beyond liberality and bordered on prodigality, a
disposition by no means advantageous to a married man who has children
to succeed to his name and position. My father had three, all sons,
and all of sufficient age to make choice of a profession. Finding,
then, that he was unable to resist his propensity, he resolved to
divest himself of the instrument and cause of his prodigality and
lavishness, to divest himself of wealth, without which Alexander
himself would have seemed parsimonious; and so calling us all three
aside one day into a room, he addressed us in words somewhat to the
following effect: "My sons, to assure you that I love you, no more
need be known or said than that you are my sons; and to encourage a
suspicion that I do not love you, no more is needed than the knowledge
that I have no self-control as far as preservation of your patrimony
is concerned; therefore, that you may for the future feel sure that I
love you like a father, and have no wish to ruin you like a
stepfather, I propose to do with you what I have for some time back
meditated, and after mature deliberation decided upon. You are now of
an age to choose your line of life or at least make choice of a
calling that will bring you honour and profit when you are older; and
what I have resolved to do is to divide my property into four parts;
three I will give to you, to each his portion without making any
difference, and the other I will retain to live upon and support
myself for whatever remainder of life Heaven may be pleased to grant
me. But I wish each of you on taking possession of the share that
falls to him to follow one of the paths I shall indicate. In this
Spain of ours there is a proverb, to my mind very true--as they all
are, being short aphorisms drawn from long practical experience--and
the one I refer to says, 'The church, or the sea, or the king's
house;' as much as to say, in plainer language, whoever wants to
flourish and become rich, let him follow the church, or go to sea,
adopting commerce as his calling, or go into the king's service in his
household, for they say, 'Better a king's crumb than a lord's favour.'
I say so because it is my will and pleasure that one of you should
follow letters, another trade, and the third serve the king in the
wars, for it is a difficult matter to gain admission to his service in
his household, and if war does not bring much wealth it confers great
distinction and fame. Eight days hence I will give you your full
shares in money, without defrauding you of a farthing, as you will see
in the end. Now tell me if you are willing to follow out my idea and
advice as I have laid it before you." Having called upon me as the
eldest to answer, I, after urging him not to strip himself of his
property but to spend it all as he pleased, for we were young men able
to gain our living, consented to comply with his wishes, and said that
mine were to follow the profession of arms and thereby serve God and
my king. My second brother having made the same proposal, decided upon
going to the Indies, embarking the portion that fell to him in trade.
The youngest, and in my opinion the wisest, said he would rather
follow the church, or go to complete his studies at Salamanca. As soon
as we had come to an understanding, and made choice of our
professions, my father embraced us all, and in the short time he
mentioned carried into effect all he had promised; and when he had
given to each his share, which as well as I remember was three
thousand ducats apiece in cash (for an uncle of ours bought the estate
and paid for it down, not to let it go out of the family), we all
three on the same day took leave of our good father; and at the same
time, as it seemed to me inhuman to leave my father with such scanty
means in his old age, I induced him to take two of my three thousand
ducats, as the remainder would be enough to provide me with all a
soldier needed. My two brothers, moved by my example, gave him each a
thousand ducats, so that there was left for my father four thousand
ducats in money, besides three thousand, the value of the portion that
fell to him which he preferred to retain in land instead of selling
it. Finally, as I said, we took leave of him, and of our uncle whom I
have mentioned, not without sorrow and tears on both sides, they
charging us to let them know whenever an opportunity offered how we
fared, whether well or ill. We promised to do so, and when he had
embraced us and given us his blessing, one set out for Salamanca, the
other for Seville, and I for Alicante, where I had heard there was a
Genoese vessel taking in a cargo of wool for Genoa. It is now some
twenty-two years since I left my father's house, and all that time,
though I have written several letters, I have had no news whatever of
him or of my brothers; my own adventures during that period I will now
relate briefly. I embarked at Alicante, reached Genoa after a
prosperous voyage, and proceeded thence to Milan, where I provided
myself with arms and a few soldier's accoutrements; thence it was my
intention to go and take service in Piedmont, but as I was already on
the road to Alessandria della Paglia, I learned that the great Duke of
Alva was on his way to Flanders. I changed my plans, joined him,
served under him in the campaigns he made, was present at the deaths
of the Counts Egmont and Horn, and was promoted to be ensign under a
famous captain of Guadalajara, Diego de Urbina by name. Some time
after my arrival in Flanders news came of the league that his Holiness
Pope Pius V of happy memory, had made with Venice and Spain against
the common enemy, the Turk, who had just then with his fleet taken the
famous island of Cyprus, which belonged to the Venetians, a loss
deplorable and disastrous. It was known as a fact that the Most Serene
Don John of Austria, natural brother of our good king Don Philip, was
coming as commander-in-chief of the allied forces, and rumours were
abroad of the vast warlike preparations which were being made, all
which stirred my heart and filled me with a longing to take part in
the campaign which was expected; and though I had reason to believe,
and almost certain promises, that on the first opportunity that
presented itself I should be promoted to be captain, I preferred to
leave all and betake myself, as I did, to Italy; and it was my good
fortune that Don John had just arrived at Genoa, and was going on to
Naples to join the Venetian fleet, as he afterwards did at Messina. I
may say, in short, that I took part in that glorious expedition,
promoted by this time to be a captain of infantry, to which honourable
charge my good luck rather than my merits raised me; and that day--so
fortunate for Christendom, because then all the nations of the earth
were disabused of the error under which they lay in imagining the
Turks to be invincible on sea-on that day, I say, on which the Ottoman
pride and arrogance were broken, among all that were there made happy
(for the Christians who died that day were happier than those who
remained alive and victorious) I alone was miserable; for, instead of
some naval crown that I might have expected had it been in Roman
times, on the night that followed that famous day I found myself with
fetters on my feet and manacles on my hands. It happened in this way:
El Uchali, the king of Algiers, a daring and successful corsair,
having attacked and taken the leading Maltese galley (only three
knights being left alive in it, and they badly wounded), the chief
galley of John Andrea, on board of which I and my company were placed,
came to its relief, and doing as was bound to do in such a case, I
leaped on board the enemy's galley, which, sheering off from that
which had attacked it, prevented my men from following me, and so I
found myself alone in the midst of my enemies, who were in such
numbers that I was unable to resist; in short I was taken, covered
with wounds; El Uchali, as you know, sirs, made his escape with his
entire squadron, and I was left a prisoner in his power, the only sad
being among so many filled with joy, and the only captive among so
many free; for there were fifteen thousand Christians, all at the oar
in the Turkish fleet, that regained their longed-for liberty that day.
They carried me to Constantinople, where the Grand Turk, Selim, made
my master general at sea for having done his duty in the battle and
carried off as evidence of his bravery the standard of the Order of
Malta. The following year, which was the year seventy-two, I found
myself at Navarino rowing in the leading galley with the three
lanterns. There I saw and observed how the opportunity of capturing
the whole Turkish fleet in harbour was lost; for all the marines and
janizzaries that belonged to it made sure that they were about to be
attacked inside the very harbour, and had their kits and pasamaques,
or shoes, ready to flee at once on shore without waiting to be
assailed, in so great fear did they stand of our fleet. But Heaven
ordered it otherwise, not for any fault or neglect of the general who
commanded on our side, but for the sins of Christendom, and because it
was God's will and pleasure that we should always have instruments of
punishment to chastise us. As it was, El Uchali took refuge at Modon,
which is an island near Navarino, and landing forces fortified the
mouth of the harbour and waited quietly until Don John retired. On
this expedition was taken the galley called the Prize, whose captain
was a son of the famous corsair Barbarossa. It was taken by the chief
Neapolitan galley called the She-wolf, commanded by that thunderbolt
of war, that father of his men, that successful and unconquered
captain Don Alvaro de Bazan, Marquis of Santa Cruz; and I cannot help
telling you what took place at the capture of the Prize. The son of
Barbarossa was so cruel, and treated his slaves so badly, that, when
those who were at the oars saw that the She-wolf galley was bearing
down upon them and gaining upon them, they all at once dropped their
oars and seized their captain who stood on the stage at the end of the
gangway shouting to them to row lustily; and passing him on from bench
to bench, from the poop to the prow, they so bit him that before he
had got much past the mast his soul had already got to hell; so great,
as I said, was the cruelty with which he treated them, and the hatred
with which they hated him. We returned to Constantinople, and the
following year, seventy-three, it became known that Don John had
seized Tunis and taken the kingdom from the Turks, and placed Muley
Hamet in possession, putting an end to the hopes which Muley Hamida,
the cruelest and bravest Moor in the world, entertained of returning
to reign there. The Grand Turk took the loss greatly to heart, and
with the cunning which all his race possess, he made peace with the
Venetians (who were much more eager for it than he was), and the
following year, seventy-four, he attacked the Goletta and the fort
which Don John had left half built near Tunis. While all these events
were occurring, I was labouring at the oar without any hope of
freedom; at least I had no hope of obtaining it by ransom, for I was
firmly resolved not to write to my father telling him of my
misfortunes. At length the Goletta fell, and the fort fell, before
which places there were seventy-five thousand regular Turkish
soldiers, and more than four hundred thousand Moors and Arabs from all
parts of Africa, and in the train of all this great host such
munitions and engines of war, and so many pioneers that with their
hands they might have covered the Goletta and the fort with handfuls
of earth. The first to fall was the Goletta, until then reckoned
impregnable, and it fell, not by any fault of its defenders, who did
all that they could and should have done, but because experiment
proved how easily entrenchments could be made in the desert sand
there; for water used to be found at two palms depth, while the Turks
found none at two yards; and so by means of a quantity of sandbags
they raised their works so high that they commanded the walls of the
fort, sweeping them as if from a cavalier, so that no one was able to
make a stand or maintain the defence. It was a common opinion that our
men should not have shut themselves up in the Goletta, but should have
waited in the open at the landing-place; but those who say so talk at
random and with little knowledge of such matters; for if in the
Goletta and in the fort there were barely seven thousand soldiers, how
could such a small number, however resolute, sally out and hold their
own against numbers like those of the enemy? And how is it possible to
help losing a stronghold that is not relieved, above all when
surrounded by a host of determined enemies in their own country? But
many thought, and I thought so too, that it was special favour and
mercy which Heaven showed to Spain in permitting the destruction of
that source and hiding place of mischief, that devourer, sponge, and
moth of countless money, fruitlessly wasted there to no other purpose
save preserving the memory of its capture by the invincible Charles V;
as if to make that eternal, as it is and will be, these stones were
needed to support it. The fort also fell; but the Turks had to win it
inch by inch, for the soldiers who defended it fought so gallantly and
stoutly that the number of the enemy killed in twenty-two general
assaults exceeded twenty-five thousand. Of three hundred that remained
alive not one was taken unwounded, a clear and manifest proof of their
gallantry and resolution, and how sturdily they had defended
themselves and held their post. A small fort or tower which was in the
middle of the lagoon under the command of Don Juan Zanoguera, a
Valencian gentleman and a famous soldier, capitulated upon terms. They
took prisoner Don Pedro Puertocarrero, commandant of the Goletta, who
had done all in his power to defend his fortress, and took the loss of
it so much to heart that he died of grief on the way to
Constantinople, where they were carrying him a prisoner. They also
took the commandant of the fort, Gabrio Cerbellon by name, a Milanese
gentleman, a great engineer and a very brave soldier. In these two
fortresses perished many persons of note, among whom was Pagano Doria,
knight of the Order of St. John, a man of generous disposition, as was
shown by his extreme liberality to his brother, the famous John Andrea
Doria; and what made his death the more sad was that he was slain by
some Arabs to whom, seeing that the fort was now lost, he entrusted
himself, and who offered to conduct him in the disguise of a Moor to
Tabarca, a small fort or station on the coast held by the Genoese
employed in the coral fishery. These Arabs cut off his head and
carried it to the commander of the Turkish fleet, who proved on them
the truth of our Castilian proverb, that "though the treason may
please, the traitor is hated;" for they say he ordered those who
brought him the present to be hanged for not having brought him alive.
Among the Christians who were taken in the fort was one named Don
Pedro de Aguilar, a native of some place, I know not what, in
Andalusia, who had been ensign in the fort, a soldier of great repute
and rare intelligence, who had in particular a special gift for what
they call poetry. I say so because his fate brought him to my galley
and to my bench, and made him a slave to the same master; and before
we left the port this gentleman composed two sonnets by way of
epitaphs, one on the Goletta and the other on the fort; indeed, I may
as well repeat them, for I have them by heart, and I think they will
be liked rather than disliked. The instant the captive mentioned the
name of Don Pedro de Aguilar, Don Fernando looked at his companions
and they all three smiled; and when he came to speak of the sonnets
one of them said, "Before your worship proceeds any further I entreat
you to tell me what became of that Don Pedro de Aguilar you have
spoken of." "All I know is," replied the captive, "that after having
been in Constantinople two years, he escaped in the disguise of an
Arnaut, in company with a Greek spy; but whether he regained his
liberty or not I cannot tell, though I fancy he did, because a year
afterwards I saw the Greek at Constantinople, though I was unable to
ask him what the result of the journey was." "Well then, you are
right," returned the gentleman, "for that Don Pedro is my brother, and
he is now in our village in good health, rich, married, and with three
children." "Thanks be to God for all the mercies he has shown him,"
said the captive; "for to my mind there is no happiness on earth to
compare with recovering lost liberty." "And what is more," said the
gentleman, "I know the sonnets my brother made." "Then let your
worship repeat them," said the captive, "for you will recite them
better than I can." "With all my heart," said the gentleman; "that on
the Goletta runs thus." CHAPTER XL. IN WHICH THE STORY OF THE CAPTIVE
IS CONTINUED. SONNET "Blest souls, that, from this mortal husk set
free, In guerdon of brave deeds beatified, Above this lowly orb of
ours abide Made heirs of heaven and immortality, With noble rage and
ardour glowing ye Your strength, while strength was yours, in battle
plied, And with your own blood and the foeman's dyed The sandy soil
and the encircling sea. It was the ebbing life-blood first that failed
The weary arms; the stout hearts never quailed. Though vanquished, yet
ye earned the victor's crown: Though mourned, yet still triumphant was
your fall For there ye won, between the sword and wall, In Heaven
glory and on earth renown." "That is it exactly, according to my
recollection," said the captive. "Well then, that on the fort," said
the gentleman, "if my memory serves me, goes thus: SONNET "Up from
this wasted soil, this shattered shell, Whose walls and towers here in
ruin lie, Three thousand soldier souls took wing on high, In the
bright mansions of the blest to dwell. The onslaught of the foeman to
repel By might of arm all vainly did they try, And when at length
'twas left them but to die, Wearied and few the last defenders fell.
And this same arid soil hath ever been A haunt of countless mournful
memories, As well in our day as in days of yore. But never yet to
Heaven it sent, I ween, From its hard bosom purer souls than these, Or
braver bodies on its surface bore." The sonnets were not disliked, and
the captive was rejoiced at the tidings they gave him of his comrade,
and continuing his tale, he went on to say: The Goletta and the fort
being thus in their hands, the Turks gave orders to dismantle the
Goletta--for the fort was reduced to such a state that there was
nothing left to level--and to do the work more quickly and easily they
mined it in three places; but nowhere were they able to blow up the
part which seemed to be the least strong, that is to say, the old
walls, while all that remained standing of the new fortifications that
the Fratin had made came to the ground with the greatest ease. Finally
the fleet returned victorious and triumphant to Constantinople, and a
few months later died my master, El Uchali, otherwise Uchali Fartax,
which means in Turkish "the scabby renegade;" for that he was; it is
the practice with the Turks to name people from some defect or virtue
they may possess; the reason being that there are among them only four
surnames belonging to families tracing their descent from the Ottoman
house, and the others, as I have said, take their names and surnames
either from bodily blemishes or moral qualities. This "scabby one"
rowed at the oar as a slave of the Grand Signor's for fourteen years,
and when over thirty-four years of age, in resentment at having been
struck by a Turk while at the oar, turned renegade and renounced his
faith in order to be able to revenge himself; and such was his valour
that, without owing his advancement to the base ways and means by
which most favourites of the Grand Signor rise to power, he came to be
king of Algiers, and afterwards general-on-sea, which is the third
place of trust in the realm. He was a Calabrian by birth, and a worthy
man morally, and he treated his slaves with great humanity. He had
three thousand of them, and after his death they were divided, as he
directed by his will, between the Grand Signor (who is heir of all who
die and shares with the children of the deceased) and his renegades. I
fell to the lot of a Venetian renegade who, when a cabin boy on board
a ship, had been taken by Uchali and was so much beloved by him that
he became one of his most favoured youths. He came to be the most
cruel renegade I ever saw: his name was Hassan Aga, and he grew very
rich and became king of Algiers. With him I went there from
Constantinople, rather glad to be so near Spain, not that I intended
to write to anyone about my unhappy lot, but to try if fortune would
be kinder to me in Algiers than in Constantinople, where I had
attempted in a thousand ways to escape without ever finding a
favourable time or chance; but in Algiers I resolved to seek for other
means of effecting the purpose I cherished so dearly; for the hope of
obtaining my liberty never deserted me; and when in my plots and
schemes and attempts the result did not answer my expectations,
without giving way to despair I immediately began to look out for or
conjure up some new hope to support me, however faint or feeble it
might be. In this way I lived on immured in a building or prison
called by the Turks a bano in which they confine the Christian
captives, as well those that are the king's as those belonging to
private individuals, and also what they call those of the Almacen,
which is as much as to say the slaves of the municipality, who serve
the city in the public works and other employments; but captives of
this kind recover their liberty with great difficulty, for, as they
are public property and have no particular master, there is no one
with whom to treat for their ransom, even though they may have the
means. To these banos, as I have said, some private individuals of the
town are in the habit of bringing their captives, especially when they
are to be ransomed; because there they can keep them in safety and
comfort until their ransom arrives. The king's captives also, that are
on ransom, do not go out to work with the rest of the crew, unless
when their ransom is delayed; for then, to make them write for it more
pressingly, they compel them to work and go for wood, which is no
light labour. I, however, was one of those on ransom, for when it was
discovered that I was a captain, although I declared my scanty means
and want of fortune, nothing could dissuade them from including me
among the gentlemen and those waiting to be ransomed. They put a chain
on me, more as a mark of this than to keep me safe, and so I passed my
life in that bano with several other gentlemen and persons of quality
marked out as held to ransom; but though at times, or rather almost
always, we suffered from hunger and scanty clothing, nothing
distressed us so much as hearing and seeing at every turn the
unexampled and unheard-of cruelties my master inflicted upon the
Christians. Every day he hanged a man, impaled one, cut off the ears
of another; and all with so little provocation, or so entirely without
any, that the Turks acknowledged he did it merely for the sake of
doing it, and because he was by nature murderously disposed towards
the whole human race. The only one that fared at all well with him was
a Spanish soldier, something de Saavedra by name, to whom he never
gave a blow himself, or ordered a blow to be given, or addressed a
hard word, although he had done things that will dwell in the memory
of the people there for many a year, and all to recover his liberty;
and for the least of the many things he did we all dreaded that he
would be impaled, and he himself was in fear of it more than once; and
only that time does not allow, I could tell you now something of what
that soldier did, that would interest and astonish you much more than
the narration of my own tale. To go on with my story; the courtyard of
our prison was overlooked by the windows of the house belonging to a
wealthy Moor of high position; and these, as is usual in Moorish
houses, were rather loopholes than windows, and besides were covered
with thick and close lattice-work. It so happened, then, that as I was
one day on the terrace of our prison with three other comrades,
trying, to pass away the time, how far we could leap with our chains,
we being alone, for all the other Christians had gone out to work, I
chanced to raise my eyes, and from one of these little closed windows
I saw a reed appear with a cloth attached to the end of it, and it
kept waving to and fro, and moving as if making signs to us to come
and take it. We watched it, and one of those who were with me went and
stood under the reed to see whether they would let it drop, or what
they would do, but as he did so the reed was raised and moved from
side to side, as if they meant to say "no" by a shake of the head. The
Christian came back, and it was again lowered, making the same
movements as before. Another of my comrades went, and with him the
same happened as with the first, and then the third went forward, but
with the same result as the first and second. Seeing this I did not
like not to try my luck, and as soon as I came under the reed it was
dropped and fell inside the bano at my feet. I hastened to untie the
cloth, in which I perceived a knot, and in this were ten cianis, which
are coins of base gold, current among the Moors, and each worth ten
reals of our money. It is needless to say I rejoiced over this
godsend, and my joy was not less than my wonder as I strove to imagine
how this good fortune could have come to us, but to me specially; for
the evident unwillingness to drop the reed for any but me showed that
it was for me the favour was intended. I took my welcome money, broke
the reed, and returned to the terrace, and looking up at the window, I
saw a very white hand put out that opened and shut very quickly. From
this we gathered or fancied that it must be some woman living in that
house that had done us this kindness, and to show that we were
grateful for it, we made salaams after the fashion of the Moors,
bowing the head, bending the body, and crossing the arms on the
breast. Shortly afterwards at the same window a small cross made of
reeds was put out and immediately withdrawn. This sign led us to
believe that some Christian woman was a captive in the house, and that
it was she who had been so good to us; but the whiteness of the hand
and the bracelets we had perceived made us dismiss that idea, though
we thought it might be one of the Christian renegades whom their
masters very often take as lawful wives, and gladly, for they prefer
them to the women of their own nation. In all our conjectures we were
wide of the truth; so from that time forward our sole occupation was
watching and gazing at the window where the cross had appeared to us,
as if it were our pole-star; but at least fifteen days passed without
our seeing either it or the hand, or any other sign and though
meanwhile we endeavoured with the utmost pains to ascertain who it was
that lived in the house, and whether there were any Christian renegade
in it, nobody could ever tell us anything more than that he who lived
there was a rich Moor of high position, Hadji Morato by name, formerly
alcaide of La Pata, an office of high dignity among them. But when we
least thought it was going to rain any more cianis from that quarter,
we saw the reed suddenly appear with another cloth tied in a larger
knot attached to it, and this at a time when, as on the former
occasion, the bano was deserted and unoccupied. We made trial as
before, each of the same three going forward before I did; but the
reed was delivered to none but me, and on my approach it was let drop.
I untied the knot and I found forty Spanish gold crowns with a paper
written in Arabic, and at the end of the writing there was a large
cross drawn. I kissed the cross, took the crowns and returned to the
terrace, and we all made our salaams; again the hand appeared, I made
signs that I would read the paper, and then the window was closed. We
were all puzzled, though filled with joy at what had taken place; and
as none of us understood Arabic, great was our curiosity to know what
the paper contained, and still greater the difficulty of finding some
one to read it. At last I resolved to confide in a renegade, a native
of Murcia, who professed a very great friendship for me, and had given
pledges that bound him to keep any secret I might entrust to him; for
it is the custom with some renegades, when they intend to return to
Christian territory, to carry about them certificates from captives of
mark testifying, in whatever form they can, that such and such a
renegade is a worthy man who has always shown kindness to Christians,
and is anxious to escape on the first opportunity that may present
itself. Some obtain these testimonials with good intentions, others
put them to a cunning use; for when they go to pillage on Christian
territory, if they chance to be cast away, or taken prisoners, they
produce their certificates and say that from these papers may be seen
the object they came for, which was to remain on Christian ground, and
that it was to this end they joined the Turks in their foray. In this
way they escape the consequences of the first outburst and make their
peace with the Church before it does them any harm, and then when they
have the chance they return to Barbary to become what they were
before. Others, however, there are who procure these papers and make
use of them honestly, and remain on Christian soil. This friend of
mine, then, was one of these renegades that I have described; he had
certificates from all our comrades, in which we testified in his
favour as strongly as we could; and if the Moors had found the papers
they would have burned him alive. I knew that he understood Arabic
very well, and could not only speak but also write it; but before I
disclosed the whole matter to him, I asked him to read for me this
paper which I had found by accident in a hole in my cell. He opened it
and remained some time examining it and muttering to himself as he
translated it. I asked him if he understood it, and he told me he did
perfectly well, and that if I wished him to tell me its meaning word
for word, I must give him pen and ink that he might do it more
satisfactorily. We at once gave him what he required, and he set about
translating it bit by bit, and when he had done he said: "All that is
here in Spanish is what the Moorish paper contains, and you must bear
in mind that when it says 'Lela Marien' it means 'Our Lady the Virgin
Mary.'" We read the paper and it ran thus: "When I was a child my
father had a slave who taught me to pray the Christian prayer in my
own language, and told me many things about Lela Marien. The Christian
died, and I know that she did not go to the fire, but to Allah,
because since then I have seen her twice, and she told me to go to the
land of the Christians, because she loves thee. Entreat her that she
be pleased to show thee how thou canst execute the command she gives
thee, for she will, such is her goodness. On my own part, and on that
of all these Christians who are with me, I promise to do all that we
can for thee, even to death. Fail not to write to me and inform me
what thou dost mean to do, and I will always answer thee; for the
great Allah has given us a Christian captive who can speak and write
thy language well, as thou mayest see by this paper; without fear,
therefore, thou canst inform us of all thou wouldst. As to what thou
sayest, that if thou dost reach the land of the Christians thou wilt
be my wife, I give thee my promise upon it as a good Christian; and
know that the Christians keep their promises better than the Moors.
Allah and Marien his mother watch over thee, my Lady." The paper being
written and folded I waited two days until the bano was empty as
before, and immediately repaired to the usual walk on the terrace to
see if there were any sign of the reed, which was not long in making
its appearance. As soon as I saw it, although I could not distinguish
who put it out, I showed the paper as a sign to attach the thread, but
it was already fixed to the reed, and to it I tied the paper; and
shortly afterwards our star once more made its appearance with the
white flag of peace, the little bundle. It was dropped, and I picked
it up, and found in the cloth, in gold and silver coins of all sorts,
more than fifty crowns, which fifty times more strengthened our joy
and doubled our hope of gaining our liberty. That very night our
renegade returned and said he had learned that the Moor we had been
told of lived in that house, that his name was Hadji Morato, that he
was enormously rich, that he had one only daughter the heiress of all
his wealth, and that it was the general opinion throughout the city
that she was the most beautiful woman in Barbary, and that several of
the viceroys who came there had sought her for a wife, but that she
had been always unwilling to marry; and he had learned, moreover, that
she had a Christian slave who was now dead; all which agreed with the
contents of the paper. We immediately took counsel with the renegade
as to what means would have to be adopted in order to carry off the
Moorish lady and bring us all to Christian territory; and in the end
it was agreed that for the present we should wait for a second
communication from Zoraida (for that was the name of her who now
desires to be called Maria), because we saw clearly that she and no
one else could find a way out of all these difficulties. When we had
decided upon this the renegade told us not to be uneasy, for he would
lose his life or restore us to liberty. For four days the bano was
filled with people, for which reason the reed delayed its appearance
for four days, but at the end of that time, when the bano was, as it
generally was, empty, it appeared with the cloth so bulky that it
promised a happy birth. Reed and cloth came down to me, and I found
another paper and a hundred crowns in gold, without any other coin.
The renegade was present, and in our cell we gave him the paper to
read, which was to this effect: "I cannot think of a plan, senor, for
our going to Spain, nor has Lela Marien shown me one, though I have
asked her. All that can be done is for me to give you plenty of money
in gold from this window. With it ransom yourself and your friends,
and let one of you go to the land of the Christians, and there buy a
vessel and come back for the others; and he will find me in my
father's garden, which is at the Babazon gate near the seashore, where
I shall be all this summer with my father and my servants. You can
carry me away from there by night without any danger, and bring me to
the vessel. And remember thou art to be my husband, else I will pray
to Marien to punish thee. If thou canst not trust anyone to go for the
vessel, ransom thyself and do thou go, for I know thou wilt return
more surely than any other, as thou art a gentleman and a Christian.
Endeavour to make thyself acquainted with the garden; and when I see
thee walking yonder I shall know that the bano is empty and I will
give thee abundance of money. Allah protect thee, senor." These were
the words and contents of the second paper, and on hearing them, each
declared himself willing to be the ransomed one, and promised to go
and return with scrupulous good faith; and I too made the same offer;
but to all this the renegade objected, saying that he would not on any
account consent to one being set free before all went together, as
experience had taught him how ill those who have been set free keep
promises which they made in captivity; for captives of distinction
frequently had recourse to this plan, paying the ransom of one who was
to go to Valencia or Majorca with money to enable him to arm a bark
and return for the others who had ransomed him, but who never came
back; for recovered liberty and the dread of losing it again efface
from the memory all the obligations in the world. And to prove the
truth of what he said, he told us briefly what had happened to a
certain Christian gentleman almost at that very time, the strangest
case that had ever occurred even there, where astonishing and
marvellous things are happening every instant. In short, he ended by
saying that what could and ought to be done was to give the money
intended for the ransom of one of us Christians to him, so that he
might with it buy a vessel there in Algiers under the pretence of
becoming a merchant and trader at Tetuan and along the coast; and when
master of the vessel, it would be easy for him to hit on some way of
getting us all out of the bano and putting us on board; especially if
the Moorish lady gave, as she said, money enough to ransom all,
because once free it would be the easiest thing in the world for us to
embark even in open day; but the greatest difficulty was that the
Moors do not allow any renegade to buy or own any craft, unless it be
a large vessel for going on roving expeditions, because they are
afraid that anyone who buys a small vessel, especially if he be a
Spaniard, only wants it for the purpose of escaping to Christian
territory. This however he could get over by arranging with a Tagarin
Moor to go shares with him in the purchase of the vessel, and in the
profit on the cargo; and under cover of this he could become master of
the vessel, in which case he looked upon all the rest as accomplished.
But though to me and my comrades it had seemed a better plan to send
to Majorca for the vessel, as the Moorish lady suggested, we did not
dare to oppose him, fearing that if we did not do as he said he would
denounce us, and place us in danger of losing all our lives if he were
to disclose our dealings with Zoraida, for whose life we would have
all given our own. We therefore resolved to put ourselves in the hands
of God and in the renegade's; and at the same time an answer was given
to Zoraida, telling her that we would do all she recommended, for she
had given as good advice as if Lela Marien had delivered it, and that
it depended on her alone whether we were to defer the business or put
it in execution at once. I renewed my promise to be her husband; and
thus the next day that the bano chanced to be empty she at different
times gave us by means of the reed and cloth two thousand gold crowns
and a paper in which she said that the next Juma, that is to say
Friday, she was going to her father's garden, but that before she went
she would give us more money; and if it were not enough we were to let
her know, as she would give us as much as we asked, for her father had
so much he would not miss it, and besides she kept all the keys. We at
once gave the renegade five hundred crowns to buy the vessel, and with
eight hundred I ransomed myself, giving the money to a Valencian
merchant who happened to be in Algiers at the time, and who had me
released on his word, pledging it that on the arrival of the first
ship from Valencia he would pay my ransom; for if he had given the
money at once it would have made the king suspect that my ransom money
had been for a long time in Algiers, and that the merchant had for his
own advantage kept it secret. In fact my master was so difficult to
deal with that I dared not on any account pay down the money at once.
The Thursday before the Friday on which the fair Zoraida was to go to
the garden she gave us a thousand crowns more, and warned us of her
departure, begging me, if I were ransomed, to find out her father's
garden at once, and by all means to seek an opportunity of going there
to see her. I answered in a few words that I would do so, and that she
must remember to commend us to Lela Marien with all the prayers the
captive had taught her. This having been done, steps were taken to
ransom our three comrades, so as to enable them to quit the bano, and
lest, seeing me ransomed and themselves not, though the money was
forthcoming, they should make a disturbance about it and the devil
should prompt them to do something that might injure Zoraida; for
though their position might be sufficient to relieve me from this
apprehension, nevertheless I was unwilling to run any risk in the
matter; and so I had them ransomed in the same way as I was, handing
over all the money to the merchant so that he might with safety and
confidence give security; without, however, confiding our arrangement
and secret to him, which might have been dangerous. CHAPTER XLI. IN
WHICH THE CAPTIVE STILL CONTINUES HIS ADVENTURES Before fifteen days
were over our renegade had already purchased an excellent vessel with
room for more than thirty persons; and to make the transaction safe
and lend a colour to it, he thought it well to make, as he did, a
voyage to a place called Shershel, twenty leagues from Algiers on the
Oran side, where there is an extensive trade in dried figs. Two or
three times he made this voyage in company with the Tagarin already
mentioned. The Moors of Aragon are called Tagarins in Barbary, and
those of Granada Mudejars; but in the Kingdom of Fez they call the
Mudejars Elches, and they are the people the king chiefly employs in
war. To proceed: every time he passed with his vessel he anchored in a
cove that was not two crossbow shots from the garden where Zoraida was
waiting; and there the renegade, together with the two Moorish lads
that rowed, used purposely to station himself, either going through
his prayers, or else practising as a part what he meant to perform in
earnest. And thus he would go to Zoraida's garden and ask for fruit,
which her father gave him, not knowing him; but though, as he
afterwards told me, he sought to speak to Zoraida, and tell her who he
was, and that by my orders he was to take her to the land of the
Christians, so that she might feel satisfied and easy, he had never
been able to do so; for the Moorish women do not allow themselves to
be seen by any Moor or Turk, unless their husband or father bid them:
with Christian captives they permit freedom of intercourse and
communication, even more than might be considered proper. But for my
part I should have been sorry if he had spoken to her, for perhaps it
might have alarmed her to find her affairs talked of by renegades. But
God, who ordered it otherwise, afforded no opportunity for our
renegade's well-meant purpose; and he, seeing how safely he could go
to Shershel and return, and anchor when and how and where he liked,
and that the Tagarin his partner had no will but his, and that, now I
was ransomed, all we wanted was to find some Christians to row, told
me to look out for any I should be willing to take with me, over and
above those who had been ransomed, and to engage them for the next
Friday, which he fixed upon for our departure. On this I spoke to
twelve Spaniards, all stout rowers, and such as could most easily
leave the city; but it was no easy matter to find so many just then,
because there were twenty ships out on a cruise and they had taken all
the rowers with them; and these would not have been found were it not
that their master remained at home that summer without going to sea in
order to finish a galliot that he had upon the stocks. To these men I
said nothing more than that the next Friday in the evening they were
to come out stealthily one by one and hang about Hadji Morato's
garden, waiting for me there until I came. These directions I gave
each one separately, with orders that if they saw any other Christians
there they were not to say anything to them except that I had directed
them to wait at that spot. This preliminary having been settled,
another still more necessary step had to be taken, which was to let
Zoraida know how matters stood that she might be prepared and
forewarned, so as not to be taken by surprise if we were suddenly to
seize upon her before she thought the Christians' vessel could have
returned. I determined, therefore, to go to the garden and try if I
could speak to her; and the day before my departure I went there under
the pretence of gathering herbs. The first person I met was her
father, who addressed me in the language that all over Barbary and
even in Constantinople is the medium between captives and Moors, and
is neither Morisco nor Castilian, nor of any other nation, but a
mixture of all languages, by means of which we can all understand one
another. In this sort of language, I say, he asked me what I wanted in
his garden, and to whom I belonged. I replied that I was a slave of
the Arnaut Mami (for I knew as a certainty that he was a very great
friend of his), and that I wanted some herbs to make a salad. He asked
me then whether I were on ransom or not, and what my master demanded
for me. While these questions and answers were proceeding, the fair
Zoraida, who had already perceived me some time before, came out of
the house in the garden, and as Moorish women are by no means
particular about letting themselves be seen by Christians, or, as I
have said before, at all coy, she had no hesitation in coming to where
her father stood with me; moreover her father, seeing her approaching
slowly, called to her to come. It would be beyond my power now to
describe to you the great beauty, the high-bred air, the brilliant
attire of my beloved Zoraida as she presented herself before my eyes.
I will content myself with saying that more pearls hung from her fair
neck, her ears, and her hair than she had hairs on her head. On her
ankles, which as is customary were bare, she had carcajes (for so
bracelets or anklets are called in Morisco) of the purest gold, set
with so many diamonds that she told me afterwards her father valued
them at ten thousand doubloons, and those she had on her wrists were
worth as much more. The pearls were in profusion and very fine, for
the highest display and adornment of the Moorish women is decking
themselves with rich pearls and seed-pearls; and of these there are
therefore more among the Moors than among any other people. Zoraida's
father had to the reputation of possessing a great number, and the
purest in all Algiers, and of possessing also more than two hundred
thousand Spanish crowns; and she, who is now mistress of me only, was
mistress of all this. Whether thus adorned she would have been
beautiful or not, and what she must have been in her prosperity, may
be imagined from the beauty remaining to her after so many hardships;
for, as everyone knows, the beauty of some women has its times and its
seasons, and is increased or diminished by chance causes; and
naturally the emotions of the mind will heighten or impair it, though
indeed more frequently they totally destroy it. In a word she
presented herself before me that day attired with the utmost
splendour, and supremely beautiful; at any rate, she seemed to me the
most beautiful object I had ever seen; and when, besides, I thought of
all I owed to her I felt as though I had before me some heavenly being
come to earth to bring me relief and happiness. As she approached her
father told her in his own language that I was a captive belonging to
his friend the Arnaut Mami, and that I had come for salad. She took up
the conversation, and in that mixture of tongues I have spoken of she
asked me if I was a gentleman, and why I was not ransomed. I answered
that I was already ransomed, and that by the price it might be seen
what value my master set on me, as I had given one thousand five
hundred zoltanis for me; to which she replied, "Hadst thou been my
father's, I can tell thee, I would not have let him part with thee for
twice as much, for you Christians always tell lies about yourselves
and make yourselves out poor to cheat the Moors." "That may be, lady,"
said I; "but indeed I dealt truthfully with my master, as I do and
mean to do with everybody in the world." "And when dost thou go?" said
Zoraida. "To-morrow, I think," said I, "for there is a vessel here
from France which sails to-morrow, and I think I shall go in her."
"Would it not be better," said Zoraida, "to wait for the arrival of
ships from Spain and go with them and not with the French who are not
your friends?" "No," said I; "though if there were intelligence that a
vessel were now coming from Spain it is true I might, perhaps, wait
for it; however, it is more likely I shall depart to-morrow, for the
longing I feel to return to my country and to those I love is so great
that it will not allow me to wait for another opportunity, however
more convenient, if it be delayed." "No doubt thou art married in
thine own country," said Zoraida, "and for that reason thou art
anxious to go and see thy wife." "I am not married," I replied, "but I
have given my promise to marry on my arrival there." "And is the lady
beautiful to whom thou hast given it?" said Zoraida. "So beautiful,"
said I, "that, to describe her worthily and tell thee the truth, she
is very like thee." At this her father laughed very heartily and said,
"By Allah, Christian, she must be very beautiful if she is like my
daughter, who is the most beautiful woman in all this kingdom: only
look at her well and thou wilt see I am telling the truth." Zoraida's
father as the better linguist helped to interpret most of these words
and phrases, for though she spoke the bastard language, that, as I
have said, is employed there, she expressed her meaning more by signs
than by words. While we were still engaged in this conversation, a
Moor came running up, exclaiming that four Turks had leaped over the
fence or wall of the garden, and were gathering the fruit though it
was not yet ripe. The old man was alarmed and Zoraida too, for the
Moors commonly, and, so to speak, instinctively have a dread of the
Turks, but particularly of the soldiers, who are so insolent and
domineering to the Moors who are under their power that they treat
them worse than if they were their slaves. Her father said to Zoraida,
"Daughter, retire into the house and shut thyself in while I go and
speak to these dogs; and thou, Christian, pick thy herbs, and go in
peace, and Allah bring thee safe to thy own country." I bowed, and he
went away to look for the Turks, leaving me alone with Zoraida, who
made as if she were about to retire as her father bade her; but the
moment he was concealed by the trees of the garden, turning to me with
her eyes full of tears she said, "Tameji, cristiano, tameji?" that is
to say, "Art thou going, Christian, art thou going?" I made answer,
"Yes, lady, but not without thee, come what may: be on the watch for
me on the next Juma, and be not alarmed when thou seest us; for most
surely we shall go to the land of the Christians." This I said in such
a way that she understood perfectly all that passed between us, and
throwing her arm round my neck she began with feeble steps to move
towards the house; but as fate would have it (and it might have been
very unfortunate if Heaven had not otherwise ordered it), just as we
were moving on in the manner and position I have described, with her
arm round my neck, her father, as he returned after having sent away
the Turks, saw how we were walking and we perceived that he saw us;
but Zoraida, ready and quickwitted, took care not to remove her arm
from my neck, but on the contrary drew closer to me and laid her head
on my breast, bending her knees a little and showing all the signs and
tokens of fainting, while I at the same time made it seem as though I
were supporting her against my will. Her father came running up to
where we were, and seeing his daughter in this state asked what was
the matter with her; she, however, giving no answer, he said, "No
doubt she has fainted in alarm at the entrance of those dogs," and
taking her from mine he drew her to his own breast, while she sighing,
her eyes still wet with tears, said again, "Ameji, cristiano,
ameji"--"Go, Christian, go." To this her father replied, "There is no
need, daughter, for the Christian to go, for he has done thee no harm,
and the Turks have now gone; feel no alarm, there is nothing to hurt
thee, for as I say, the Turks at my request have gone back the way
they came." "It was they who terrified her, as thou hast said, senor,"
said I to her father; "but since she tells me to go, I have no wish to
displease her: peace be with thee, and with thy leave I will come back
to this garden for herbs if need be, for my master says there are
nowhere better herbs for salad then here." "Come back for any thou
hast need of," replied Hadji Morato; "for my daughter does not speak
thus because she is displeased with thee or any Christian: she only
meant that the Turks should go, not thou; or that it was time for thee
to look for thy herbs." With this I at once took my leave of both; and
she, looking as though her heart were breaking, retired with her
father. While pretending to look for herbs I made the round of the
garden at my ease, and studied carefully all the approaches and
outlets, and the fastenings of the house and everything that could be
taken advantage of to make our task easy. Having done so I went and
gave an account of all that had taken place to the renegade and my
comrades, and looked forward with impatience to the hour when, all
fear at an end, I should find myself in possession of the prize which
fortune held out to me in the fair and lovely Zoraida. The time passed
at length, and the appointed day we so longed for arrived; and, all
following out the arrangement and plan which, after careful
consideration and many a long discussion, we had decided upon, we
succeeded as fully as we could have wished; for on the Friday
following the day upon which I spoke to Zoraida in the garden, the
renegade anchored his vessel at nightfall almost opposite the spot
where she was. The Christians who were to row were ready and in hiding
in different places round about, all waiting for me, anxious and
elated, and eager to attack the vessel they had before their eyes; for
they did not know the renegade's plan, but expected that they were to
gain their liberty by force of arms and by killing the Moors who were
on board the vessel. As soon, then, as I and my comrades made our
appearance, all those that were in hiding seeing us came and joined
us. It was now the time when the city gates are shut, and there was no
one to be seen of whom he could inquire, he saw nothing else for it
but to push on, taking whatever road Rocinante chose--which was where
he could make his way--firmly persuaded that among these wilds he
could not fail to meet some rare adventure. As he went along, then,
occupied with these thoughts, he perceived on the summit of a height
that rose before their eyes a man who went springing from rock to rock
and from tussock to tussock with marvellous agility. As well as he
could make out he was unclad, with a thick black beard, long tangled
hair, and bare legs and feet, his thighs were covered by breeches
apparently of tawny velvet but so ragged that they showed his skin in
several places. He was bareheaded, and notwithstanding the swiftness
with which he passed as has been described, the Knight of the Rueful
Countenance observed and noted all these trifles, and though he made
the attempt, he was unable to follow him, for it was not granted to
the feebleness of Rocinante to make way over such rough ground, he
being, moreover, slow-paced and sluggish by nature. Don Quixote at
once came to the conclusion that this was the owner of the saddle-pad
and of the valise, and made up his mind to go in search of him, even
though he should have to wander a year in those mountains before he
found him, and so he directed Sancho to take a short cut over one side
of the mountain, while he himself went by the other, and perhaps by
this means they might light upon this man who had passed so quickly
out of their sight. "I could not do that," said Sancho, "for when I
separate from your worship fear at once lays hold of me, and assails
me with all sorts of panics and fancies; and let what I now say be a
notice that from this time forth I am not going to stir a finger's
width from your presence." "It shall be so," said he of the Rueful
Countenance, "and I am very glad that thou art willing to rely on my
courage, which will never fail thee, even though the soul in thy body
fail thee; so come on now behind me slowly as well as thou canst, and
make lanterns of thine eyes; let us make the circuit of this ridge;
perhaps we shall light upon this man that we saw, who no doubt is no
other than the owner of what we found." To which Sancho made answer,
"Far better would it be not to look for him, for, if we find him, and
he happens to be the owner of the money, it is plain I must restore
it; it would be better, therefore, that without taking this needless
trouble, I should keep possession of it until in some other less
meddlesome and officious way the real owner may be discovered; and
perhaps that will be when I shall have spent it, and then the king
will hold me harmless." "Thou art wrong there, Sancho," said Don
Quixote, "for now that we have a suspicion who the owner is, and have
him almost before us, we are bound to seek him and make restitution;
and if we do not see him, the strong suspicion we have as to his being
the owner makes us as guilty as if he were so; and so, friend Sancho,
let not our search for him give thee any uneasiness, for if we find
him it will relieve mine." And so saying he gave Rocinante the spur,
and Sancho followed him on foot and loaded, and after having partly
made the circuit of the mountain they found lying in a ravine, dead
and half devoured by dogs and pecked by jackdaws, a mule saddled and
bridled, all which still further strengthened their suspicion that he
who had fled was the owner of the mule and the saddle-pad. As they
stood looking at it they heard a whistle like that of a shepherd
watching his flock, and suddenly on their left there appeared a great
number of goats and behind them on the summit of the mountain the
goatherd in charge of them, a man advanced in years. Don Quixote
called aloud to him and begged him to come down to where they stood.
He shouted in return, asking what had brought them to that spot,
seldom or never trodden except by the feet of goats, or of the wolves
and other wild beasts that roamed around. Sancho in return bade him
come down, and they would explain all to him. The goatherd descended,
and reaching the place where Don Quixote stood, he said, "I will wager
you are looking at that hack mule that lies dead in the hollow there,
and, faith, it has been lying there now these six months; tell me,
have you come upon its master about here?" "We have come upon nobody,"
answered Don Quixote, "nor on anything except a saddle-pad and a
little valise that we found not far from this." "I found it too," said
the goatherd, "but I would not lift it nor go near it for fear of some
ill-luck or being charged with theft, for the devil is crafty, and
things rise up under one's feet to make one fall without knowing why
or wherefore." "That's exactly what I say," said Sancho; "I found it
too, and I would not go within a stone's throw of it; there I left it,
and there it lies just as it was, for I don't want a dog with a bell."
"Tell me, good man," said Don Quixote, "do you know who is the owner
of this property?" "All I can tell you," said the goatherd, "is that
about six months ago, more or less, there arrived at a shepherd's hut
three leagues, perhaps, away from this, a youth of well-bred
appearance and manners, mounted on that same mule which lies dead
here, and with the same saddle-pad and valise which you say you found
and did not touch. He asked us what part of this sierra was the most
rugged and retired; we told him that it was where we now are; and so
in truth it is, for if you push on half a league farther, perhaps you
will not be able to find your way out; and I am wondering how you have
managed to come here, for there is no road or path that leads to this
spot. I say, then, that on hearing our answer the youth turned about
and made for the place we pointed out to him, leaving us all charmed
with his good looks, and wondering at his question and the haste with
which we saw him depart in the direction of the sierra; and after that
we saw him no more, until some days afterwards he crossed the path of
one of our shepherds, and without saying a word to him, came up to him
and gave him several cuffs and kicks, and then turned to the ass with
our provisions and took all the bread and cheese it carried, and
having done this made off back again into the sierra with
extraordinary swiftness. When some of us goatherds learned this we
went in search of him for about two days through the most remote
portion of this sierra, at the end of which we found him lodged in the
hollow of a large thick cork tree. He came out to meet us with great
gentleness, with his dress now torn and his face so disfigured and
burned by the sun, that we hardly recognised him but that his clothes,
though torn, convinced us, from the recollection we had of them, that
he was the person we were looking for. He saluted us courteously, and
in a few well-spoken words he told us not to wonder at seeing him
going about in this guise, as it was binding upon him in order that he
might work out a penance which for his many sins had been imposed upon
him. We asked him to tell us who he was, but we were never able to
find out from him: we begged of him too, when he was in want of food,
which he could not do without, to tell us where we should find him, as
we would bring it to him with all good-will and readiness; or if this
were not to his taste, at least to come and ask it of us and not take
it by force from the shepherds. He thanked us for the offer, begged
pardon for the late assault, and promised for the future to ask it in
God's name without offering violence to anybody. As for fixed abode,
he said he had no other than that which chance offered wherever night
might overtake him; and his words ended in an outburst of weeping so
bitter that we who listened to him must have been very stones had we
not joined him in it, comparing what we saw of him the first time with
what we saw now; for, as I said, he was a graceful and gracious youth,
and in his courteous and polished language showed himself to be of
good birth and courtly breeding, and rustics as we were that listened
to him, even to our rusticity his gentle bearing sufficed to make it
plain. "But in the midst of his conversation he stopped and became
silent, keeping his eyes fixed upon the ground for some time, during
which we stood still waiting anxiously to see what would come of this
abstraction; and with no little pity, for from his behaviour, now
staring at the ground with fixed gaze and eyes wide open without
moving an eyelid, again closing them, compressing his lips and raising
his eyebrows, we could perceive plainly that a fit of madness of some
kind had come upon him; and before long he showed that what we
imagined was the truth, for he arose in a fury from the ground where
he had thrown himself, and attacked the first he found near him with
such rage and fierceness that if we had not dragged him off him, he
would have beaten or bitten him to death, all the while exclaiming,
'Oh faithless Fernando, here, here shalt thou pay the penalty of the
wrong thou hast done me; these hands shall tear out that heart of
thine, abode and dwelling of all iniquity, but of deceit and fraud
above all; and to these he added other words all in effect upbraiding
this Fernando and charging him with treachery and faithlessness. "We
forced him to release his hold with no little difficulty, and without
another word he left us, and rushing off plunged in among these brakes
and brambles, so as to make it impossible for us to follow him; from
this we suppose that madness comes upon him from time to time, and
that some one called Fernando must have done him a wrong of a grievous
nature such as the condition to which it had brought him seemed to
show. All this has been since then confirmed on those occasions, and
they have been many, on which he has crossed our path, at one time to
beg the shepherds to give him some of the food they carry, at another
to take it from them by force; for when there is a fit of madness upon
him, even though the shepherds offer it freely, he will not accept it
but snatches it from them by dint of blows; but when he is in his
senses he begs it for the love of God, courteously and civilly, and
receives it with many thanks and not a few tears. And to tell you the
truth, sirs," continued the goatherd, "it was yesterday that we
resolved, I and four of the lads, two of them our servants, and the
other two friends of mine, to go in search of him until we find him,
and when we do to take him, whether by force or of his own consent, to
the town of Almodovar, which is eight leagues from this, and there
strive to cure him (if indeed his malady admits of a cure), or learn
when he is in his senses who he is, and if he has relatives to whom we
may give notice of his misfortune. This, sirs, is all I can say in
answer to what you have asked me; and be sure that the owner of the
articles you found is he whom you saw pass by with such nimbleness and
so naked." For Don Quixote had already described how he had seen the
man go bounding along the mountain side, and he was now filled with
amazement at what he heard from the goatherd, and more eager than ever
to discover who the unhappy madman was; and in his heart he resolved,
as he had done before, to search for him all over the mountain, not
leaving a corner or cave unexamined until he had found him. But chance
arranged matters better than he expected or hoped, for at that very
moment, in a gorge on the mountain that opened where they stood, the
youth he wished to find made his appearance, coming along talking to
himself in a way that shows plainly he is out of his senses. He eats
little and sleeps little, and all he eats is fruit, and when he
sleeps, if he sleeps at all, it is in the field on the hard earth like
a brute beast. Sometimes he gazes at the sky, at other times he fixes
his eyes on the earth in such an abstracted way that he might be taken
for a clothed statue, with its drapery stirred by the wind. In short,
he shows such signs of a heart crushed by suffering, that all we who
know him believe that when to-morrow the fair Quiteria says 'yes,' it
will be his sentence of death." "God will guide it better," said
Sancho, "for God who gives the wound gives the salve; nobody knows
what will happen; there are a good many hours between this and
to-morrow, and any one of them, or any moment, the house may fall; I
have seen the rain coming down and the sun shining all at one time;
many a one goes to bed in good health who can't stir the next day. And
tell me, is there anyone who can boast of having driven a nail into
the wheel of fortune? No, faith; and between a woman's 'yes' and 'no'
I wouldn't venture to put the point of a pin, for there would not be
room for it; if you tell me Quiteria loves Basilio heart and soul,
then I'll give him a bag of good luck; for love, I have heard say,
looks through spectacles that make copper seem gold, poverty wealth,
and blear eyes pearls." "What art thou driving at, Sancho? curses on
thee!" said Don Quixote; "for when thou takest to stringing proverbs
and sayings together, no one can understand thee but Judas himself,
and I wish he had thee. Tell me, thou animal, what dost thou know
about nails or wheels, or anything else?" "Oh, if you don't understand
me," replied Sancho, "it is no wonder my words are taken for nonsense;
but no matter; I understand myself, and I know I have not said
anything very foolish in what I have said; only your worship, senor,
is always gravelling at everything I say, nay, everything I do."
"Cavilling, not gravelling," said Don Quixote, "thou prevaricator of
honest language, God confound thee!" "Don't find fault with me, your
worship," returned Sancho, "for you know I have not been bred up at
court or trained at Salamanca, to know whether I am adding or dropping
a letter or so in my words. Why! God bless me, it's not fair to force
a Sayago-man to speak like a Toledan; maybe there are Toledans who do
not hit it off when it comes to polished talk." "That is true," said
the licentiate, "for those who have been bred up in the Tanneries and
the Zocodover cannot talk like those who are almost all day pacing the
cathedral cloisters, and yet they are all Toledans. Pure, correct,
elegant and lucid language will be met with in men of courtly breeding
and discrimination, though they may have been born in Majalahonda; I
say of discrimination, because there are many who are not so, and
discrimination is the grammar of good language, if it be accompanied
by practice. I, sirs, for my sins have studied canon law at Salamanca,
and I rather pique myself on expressing my meaning in clear, plain,
and intelligible language." "If you did not pique yourself more on
your dexterity with those foils you carry than on dexterity of
tongue," said the other student, "you would have been head of the
degrees, where you are now tail." "Look here, bachelor Corchuelo,"
returned the licentiate, "you have the most mistaken idea in the world
about skill with the sword, if you think it useless." "It is no idea
on my part, but an established truth," replied Corchuelo; "and if you
wish me to prove it to you by experiment, you have swords there, and
it is a good opportunity; I have a steady hand and a strong arm, and
these joined with my resolution, which is not small, will make you
confess that I am not mistaken. Dismount and put in practice your
positions and circles and angles and science, for I hope to make you
see stars at noonday with my rude raw swordsmanship, in which, next to
God, I place my trust that the man is yet to be born who will make me
turn my back, and that there is not one in the world I will not compel
to give ground." "As to whether you turn your back or not, I do not
concern myself," replied the master of fence; "though it might be that
your grave would be dug on the spot where you planted your foot the
first time; I mean that you would be stretched dead there for
despising skill with the sword." "We shall soon see," replied
Corchuelo, and getting off his ass briskly, he drew out furiously one
of the swords the licentiate carried on his beast. "It must not be
that way," said Don Quixote at this point; "I will be the director of
this fencing match, and judge of this often disputed question;" and
dismounting from Rocinante and grasping his lance, he planted himself
in the middle of the road, just as the licentiate, with an easy,
graceful bearing and step, advanced towards Corchuelo, who came on
against him, darting fire from his eyes, as the saying is. The other
two of the company, the peasants, without dismounting from their
asses, served as spectators of the mortal tragedy. The cuts, thrusts,
down strokes, back strokes and doubles, that Corchuelo delivered were
past counting, and came thicker than hops or hail. He attacked like an
angry lion, but he was met by a tap on the mouth from the button of
the licentiate's sword that checked him in the midst of his furious
onset, and made him kiss it as if it were a relic, though not as
devoutly as relics are and ought to be kissed. The end of it was that
the licentiate reckoned up for him by thrusts every one of the buttons
of the short cassock he wore, tore the skirts into strips, like the
tails of a cuttlefish, knocked off his hat twice, and so completely
tired him out, that in vexation, anger, and rage, he took the sword by
the hilt and flung it away with such force, that one of the peasants
that were there, who was a notary, and who went for it, made an
affidavit afterwards that he sent it nearly three-quarters of a
league, which testimony will serve, and has served, to show and
establish with all certainty that strength is overcome by skill.
Corchuelo sat down wearied, and Sancho approaching him said, "By my
faith, senor bachelor, if your worship takes my advice, you will never
challenge anyone to fence again, only to wrestle and throw the bar,
for you have the youth and strength for that; but as for these fencers
as they call them, I have heard say they can put the point of a sword
through the eye of a needle." "I am satisfied with having tumbled off
my donkey," said Corchuelo, "and with having had the truth I was so
ignorant of proved to me by experience;" and getting up he embraced
the licentiate, and they were better friends than ever; and not caring
to wait for the notary who had gone for the sword, as they saw he
would be a long time about it, they resolved to push on so as to reach
the village of Quiteria, to which they all belonged, in good time.
During the remainder of the journey the licentiate held forth to them
on the excellences of the sword, with such conclusive arguments, and
such figures and mathematical proofs, that all were convinced of the
value of the science, and Corchuelo cured of his dogmatism. It grew
dark; but before they reached the town it seemed to them all as if
there was a heaven full of countless glittering stars in front of it.
They heard, too, the pleasant mingled notes of a variety of
instruments, flutes, drums, psalteries, pipes, tabors, and timbrels,
and as they drew near they perceived that the trees of a leafy arcade
that had been constructed at the entrance of the town were filled with
lights unaffected by the wind, for the breeze at the time was so
gentle that it had not power to stir the leaves on the trees. The
musicians were the life of the wedding, wandering through the pleasant
grounds in separate bands, some dancing, others singing, others
playing the various instruments already mentioned. In short, it seemed
as though mirth and gaiety were frisking and gambolling all over the
meadow. Several other persons were engaged in erecting raised benches
from which people might conveniently see the plays and dances that
were to be performed the next day on the spot dedicated to the
celebration of the marriage of Camacho the rich and the obsequies of
Basilio. Don Quixote would not enter the village, although the peasant
as well as the bachelor pressed him; he excused himself, however, on
the grounds, amply sufficient in his opinion, that it was the custom
of knights-errant to sleep in the fields and woods in preference to
towns, even were it under gilded ceilings; and so turned aside a
little out of the road, very much against Sancho's will, as the good
quarters he had enjoyed in the castle or house of Don Diego came back
to his mind. CHAPTER XX. WHEREIN AN ACCOUNT IS GIVEN OF THE WEDDING OF
CAMACHO THE RICH, TOGETHER WITH THE INCIDENT OF BASILIO THE POOR
Scarce had the fair Aurora given bright Phoebus time to dry the liquid
pearls upon her golden locks with the heat of his fervent rays, when
Don Quixote, shaking off sloth from his limbs, sprang to his feet and
called to his squire Sancho, who was still snoring; seeing which Don
Quixote ere he roused him thus addressed him: "Happy thou, above all
the dwellers on the face of the earth, that, without envying or being
envied, sleepest with tranquil mind, and that neither enchanters
persecute nor enchantments affright. Sleep, I say, and will say a
hundred times, without any jealous thoughts of thy mistress to make
thee keep ceaseless vigils, or any cares as to how thou art to pay the
debts thou owest, or find to-morrow's food for thyself and thy needy
little family, to interfere with thy repose. Ambition breaks not thy
rest, nor doth this world's empty pomp disturb thee, for the utmost
reach of thy anxiety is to provide for thy ass, since upon my
shoulders thou hast laid the support of thyself, the counterpoise and
burden that nature and custom have imposed upon masters. The servant
sleeps and the master lies awake thinking how he is to feed him,
advance him, and reward him. The distress of seeing the sky turn
brazen, and withhold its needful moisture from the earth, is not felt
by the servant but by the master, who in time of scarcity and famine
must support him who has served him in times of plenty and abundance."
To all this Sancho made no reply because he was asleep, nor would he
have wakened up so soon as he did had not Don Quixote brought him to
his senses with the butt of his lance. He awoke at last, drowsy and
lazy, and casting his eyes about in every direction, observed, "There
comes, if I don't mistake, from the quarter of that arcade a steam and
a smell a great deal more like fried rashers than galingale or thyme;
a wedding that begins with smells like that, by my faith, ought to be
plentiful and unstinting." "Have done, thou glutton," said Don
Quixote; "come, let us go and witness this bridal, and see what the
rejected Basilio does." "Let him do what he likes," returned Sancho;
"be he not poor, he would marry Quiteria. To make a grand match for
himself, and he without a farthing; is there nothing else? Faith,
senor, it's my opinion the poor man should be content with what he can
get, and not go looking for dainties in the bottom of the sea. I will
bet my arm that Camacho could bury Basilio in reals; and if that be
so, as no doubt it is, why dost thou deceive me, or wherefore seekest
thou by craft to deprive me of the means I might find of attaining my
desire?" Anselmo said no more, but he had said enough to cover
Lothario with shame and confusion, and he, feeling as it were his
honour touched by having been detected in a lie, swore to Anselmo that
he would from that moment devote himself to satisfying him without any
deception, as he would see if he had the curiosity to watch; though he
need not take the trouble, for the pains he would take to satisfy him
would remove all suspicions from his mind. Anselmo believed him, and
to afford him an opportunity more free and less liable to surprise, he
resolved to absent himself from his house for eight days, betaking
himself to that of a friend of his who lived in a village not far from
the city; and, the better to account for his departure to Camilla, he
so arranged it that the friend should send him a very pressing
invitation. Unhappy, shortsighted Anselmo, what art thou doing, what
art thou plotting, what art thou devising? Bethink thee thou art
working against thyself, plotting thine own dishonour, devising thine
own ruin. Thy wife Camilla is virtuous, thou dost possess her in peace
and quietness, no one assails thy happiness, her thoughts wander not
beyond the walls of thy house, thou art her heaven on earth, the
object of her wishes, the fulfilment of her desires, the measure
wherewith she measures her will, making it conform in all things to
thine and Heaven's. If, then, the mine of her honour, beauty, virtue,
and modesty yields thee without labour all the wealth it contains and
thou canst wish for, why wilt thou dig the earth in search of fresh
veins, of new unknown treasure, risking the collapse of all, since it
but rests on the feeble props of her weak nature? Bethink thee that
from him who seeks impossibilities that which is possible may with
justice be withheld, as was better expressed by a poet who said: 'Tis
mine to seek for life in death, Health in disease seek I, I seek in
prison freedom's breath, In traitors loyalty. So Fate that ever scorns
to grant Or grace or boon to me, Since what can never be I want,
Denies me what might be. The next day Anselmo took his departure for
the village, leaving instructions with Camilla that during his absence
Lothario would come to look after his house and to dine with her, and
that she was to treat him as she would himself. Camilla was
distressed, as a discreet and right-minded woman would be, at the
orders her husband left her, and bade him remember that it was not
becoming that anyone should occupy his seat at the table during his
absence, and if he acted thus from not feeling confidence that she
would be able to manage his house, let him try her this time, and he
would find by experience that she was equal to greater
responsibilities. Anselmo replied that it was his pleasure to have it
so, and that she had only to submit and obey. Camilla said she would
do so, though against her will. Anselmo went, and the next day
Lothario came to his house, where he was received by Camilla with a
friendly and modest welcome; but she never suffered Lothario to see
her alone, for she was always attended by her men and women servants,
especially by a handmaid of hers, Leonela by name, to whom she was
much attached (for they had been brought up together from childhood in
her father's house), and whom she had kept with her after her marriage
with Anselmo. The first three days Lothario did not speak to her,
though he might have done so when they removed the cloth and the
servants retired to dine hastily; for such were Camilla's orders; nay
more, Leonela had directions to dine earlier than Camilla and never to
leave her side. She, however, having her thoughts fixed upon other
things more to her taste, and wanting that time and opportunity for
her own pleasures, did not always obey her mistress's commands, but on
the contrary left them alone, as if they had ordered her to do so; but
the modest bearing of Camilla, the calmness of her countenance, the
composure of her aspect were enough to bridle the tongue of Lothario.
But the influence which the many virtues of Camilla exerted in
imposing silence on Lothario's tongue proved mischievous for both of
them, for if his tongue was silent his thoughts were busy, and could
dwell at leisure upon the perfections of Camilla's goodness and beauty
one by one, charms enough to warm with love a marble statue, not to
say a heart of flesh. Lothario gazed upon her when he might have been
speaking to her, and thought how worthy of being loved she was; and
thus reflection began little by little to assail his allegiance to
Anselmo, and a thousand times he thought of withdrawing from the city
and going where Anselmo should never see him nor he see Camilla. But
already the delight he found in gazing on her interposed and held him
fast. He put a constraint upon himself, and struggled to repel and
repress the pleasure he found in contemplating Camilla; when alone he
blamed himself for his weakness, called himself a bad friend, nay a
bad Christian; then he argued the matter and compared himself with
Anselmo; always coming to the conclusion that the folly and rashness
of Anselmo had been worse than his faithlessness, and that if he could
excuse his intentions as easily before God as with man, he had no
reason to fear any punishment for his offence. In short the beauty and
goodness of Camilla, joined with the opportunity which the blind
husband had placed in his hands, overthrew the loyalty of Lothario;
and giving heed to nothing save the object towards which his
inclinations led him, after Anselmo had been three days absent, during
which he had been carrying on a continual struggle with his passion,
he began to make love to Camilla with so much vehemence and warmth of
language that she was overwhelmed with amazement, and could only rise
from her place and retire to her room without answering him a word.
But the hope which always springs up with love was not weakened in
Lothario by this repelling demeanour; on the contrary his passion for
Camilla increased, and she discovering in him what she had never
expected, knew not what to do; and considering it neither safe nor
right to give him the chance or opportunity of speaking to her again,
she resolved to send, as she did that very night, one of her servants
with a letter to Anselmo, in which she addressed the following words
to him. CHAPTER XXXIV. IN WHICH IS CONTINUED THE NOVEL OF "THE
ILL-ADVISED CURIOSITY" "It is commonly said that an army looks ill
without its general and a castle without its castellan, and I say that
a young married woman looks still worse without her husband unless
there are very good reasons for it. I find myself so ill at ease
without you, and so incapable of enduring this separation, that unless
you return quickly I shall have to go for relief to my parents' house,
even if I leave yours without a protector; for the one you left me, if
indeed he deserved that title, has, I think, more regard to his own
pleasure than to what concerns you: as you are possessed of
discernment I need say no more to you, nor indeed is it fitting I
should say more." Anselmo received this letter, and from it he
gathered that Lothario had already begun his task and that Camilla
must have replied to him as he would have wished; and delighted beyond
measure at such intelligence he sent word to her not to leave his
house on any account, as he would very shortly return. Camilla was
astonished at Anselmo's reply, which placed her in greater perplexity
than before, for she neither dared to remain in her own house, nor yet
to go to her parents'; for in remaining her virtue was imperilled, and
in going she was opposing her husband's commands. Finally she decided
upon what was the worse course for her, to remain, resolving not to
fly from the presence of Lothario, that she might not give food for
gossip to her servants; and she now began to regret having written as
she had to her husband, fearing he might imagine that Lothario had
perceived in her some lightness which had impelled him to lay aside
the respect he owed her; but confident of her rectitude she put her
trust in God and in her own virtuous intentions, with which she hoped
to resist in silence all the solicitations of Lothario, without saying
anything to her husband so as not to involve him in any quarrel or
trouble; and she even began to consider how to excuse Lothario to
Anselmo when he should ask her what it was that induced her to write
that letter. With these resolutions, more honourable than judicious or
effectual, she remained the next day listening to Lothario, who
pressed his suit so strenuously that Camilla's firmness began to
waver, and her virtue had enough to do to come to the rescue of her
eyes and keep them from showing signs of a certain tender compassion
which the tears and appeals of Lothario had awakened in her bosom.
Lothario observed all this, and it inflamed him all the more. In short
he felt that while Anselmo's absence afforded time and opportunity he
must press the siege of the fortress, and so he assailed her
self-esteem with praises of her beauty, for there is nothing that more
quickly reduces and levels the castle towers of fair women's vanity
than vanity itself upon the tongue of flattery. In fact with the
utmost assiduity he undermined the rock of her purity with such
engines that had Camilla been of brass she must have fallen. He wept,
he entreated, he promised, he flattered, he importuned, he pretended
with so much feeling and apparent sincerity, that he overthrew the
virtuous resolves of Camilla and won the triumph he least expected and
most longed for. Camilla yielded, Camilla fell; but what wonder if the
friendship of Lothario could not stand firm? A clear proof to us that
the passion of love is to be conquered only by flying from it, and
that no one should engage in a struggle with an enemy so mighty; for
divine strength is needed to overcome his human power. Leonela alone
knew of her mistress's weakness, for the two false friends and new
lovers were unable to conceal it. Lothario did not care to tell
Camilla the object Anselmo had in view, nor that he had afforded him
the opportunity of attaining such a result, lest she should undervalue
his love and think that it was by chance and without intending it and
not of his own accord that he had made love to her. A few days later
Anselmo returned to his house and did not perceive what it had lost,
that which he so lightly treated and so highly prized. He went at once
to see Lothario, and found him at home; they embraced each other, and
Anselmo asked for the tidings of his life or his death. "The tidings I
have to give thee, Anselmo my friend," said Lothario, "are that thou
dost possess a wife that is worthy to be the pattern and crown of all
good wives. The words that I have addressed to her were borne away on
the wind, my promises have been despised, my presents have been
refused, such feigned tears as I shed have been turned into open
ridicule. In short, as Camilla is the essence of all beauty, so is she
the treasure-house where purity dwells, and gentleness and modesty
abide with all the virtues that can confer praise, honour, and
happiness upon a woman. Take back thy money, my friend; here it is,
and I have had no need to touch it, for the chastity of Camilla yields
not to things so base as gifts or promises. Be content, Anselmo, and
refrain from making further proof; and as thou hast passed dryshod
through the sea of those doubts and suspicions that are and may be
entertained of women, seek not to plunge again into the deep ocean of
new embarrassments, or with another pilot make trial of the goodness
and strength of the bark that Heaven has granted thee for thy passage
across the sea of this world; but reckon thyself now safe in port,
moor thyself with the anchor of sound reflection, and rest in peace
until thou art called upon to pay that debt which no nobility on earth
can escape paying." Anselmo was completely satisfied by the words of
Lothario, and believed them as fully as if they had been spoken by an
oracle; nevertheless he begged of him not to relinquish the
undertaking, were it but for the sake of curiosity and amusement;
though thenceforward he need not make use of the same earnest
endeavours as before; all he wished him to do was to write some verses
to her, praising her under the name of Chloris, for he himself would
give her to understand that he was in love with a lady to whom he had
given that name to enable him to sing her praises with the decorum due
to her modesty; and if Lothario were unwilling to take the trouble of
writing the verses he would compose them himself. "That will not be
necessary," said Lothario, "for the muses are not such enemies of mine
but that they visit me now and then in the course of the year. Do thou
tell Camilla what thou hast proposed about a pretended amour of mine;
as for the verses will make them, and if not as good as the subject
deserves, they shall be at least the best I can produce." An agreement
to this effect was made between the friends, the ill-advised one and
the treacherous, and Anselmo returning to his house asked Camilla the
question she already wondered he had not asked before--what it was
that had caused her to write the letter she had sent him. Camilla
replied that it had seemed to her that Lothario looked at her somewhat
more freely than when he had been at home; but that now she was
undeceived and believed it to have been only her own imagination, for
Lothario now avoided seeing her, or being alone with her. Anselmo told
her she might be quite easy on the score of that suspicion, for he
knew that Lothario was in love with a damsel of rank in the city whom
he celebrated under the name of Chloris, and that even if he were not,
his fidelity and their great friendship left no room for fear. Had not
Camilla, however, been informed beforehand by Lothario that this love
for Chloris was a pretence, and that he himself had told Anselmo of it
in order to be able sometimes to give utterance to the praises of
Camilla herself, no doubt she would have fallen into the despairing
toils of jealousy; but being forewarned she received the startling
news without uneasiness. The next day as the three were at table
Anselmo asked Lothario to recite something of what he had composed for
his mistress Chloris; for as Camilla did not know her, he might safely
say what he liked. "Even did she know her," returned Lothario, "I
would hide nothing, for when a lover praises his lady's beauty, and
charges her with cruelty, he casts no imputation upon her fair name;
at any rate, all I can say is that yesterday I made a sonnet on the
ingratitude of this Chloris, which goes thus: SONNET At midnight, in
the silence, when the eyes Of happier mortals balmy slumbers close,
The weary tale of my unnumbered woes To Chloris and to Heaven is wont
to rise. And when the light of day returning dyes The portals of the
east with tints of rose, With undiminished force my sorrow flows In
broken accents and in burning sighs. And when the sun ascends his
star-girt throne, And on the earth pours down his midday beams, Noon
but renews my wailing and my tears; And with the night again goes up
my moan. Yet ever in my agony it seems To me that neither Heaven nor
Chloris hears." The sonnet pleased Camilla, and still more Anselmo,
for he praised it and said the lady was excessively cruel who made no
return for sincerity so manifest. On which Camilla said, "Then all
that love-smitten poets say is true?" "As poets they do not tell the
truth," replied Lothario; "but as lovers they are not more defective
in expression than they are truthful." "There is no doubt of that,"
observed Anselmo, anxious to support and uphold Lothario's ideas with
Camilla, who was as regardless of his design as she was deep in love
with Lothario; and so taking delight in anything that was his, and
knowing that his thoughts and writings had her for their object, and
that she herself was the real Chloris, she asked him to repeat some
other sonnet or verses if he recollected any. "I do," replied
Lothario, "but I do not think it as good as the first one, or, more
correctly speaking, less bad; but you can easily judge, for it is
this. SONNET I know that I am doomed; death is to me As certain as
that thou, ungrateful fair, Dead at thy feet shouldst see me lying,
ere My heart repented of its love for thee. If buried in oblivion I
should be, Bereft of life, fame, favour, even there It would be found
that I thy image bear Deep graven in my breast for all to see. This
like some holy relic do I prize To save me from the fate my truth
entails, Truth that to thy hard heart its vigour owes. Alas for him
that under lowering skies, In peril o'er a trackless ocean sails,
Where neither friendly port nor pole-star shows." Anselmo praised this
second sonnet too, as he had praised the first; and so he went on
adding link after link to the chain with which he was binding himself
and making his dishonour secure; for when Lothario was doing most to
dishonour him he told him he was most honoured; and thus each step
that Camilla descended towards the depths of her abasement, she
mounted, in his opinion, towards the summit of virtue and fair fame.
It so happened that finding herself on one occasion alone with her
maid, Camilla said to her, "I am ashamed to think, my dear Leonela,
how lightly I have valued myself that I did not compel Lothario to
purchase by at least some expenditure of time that full possession of
me that I so quickly yielded him of my own free will. I fear that he
will think ill of my pliancy or lightness, not considering the
irresistible influence he brought to bear upon me." "Let not that
trouble you, my lady," said Leonela, "for it does not take away the
value of the thing given or make it the less precious to give it
quickly if it be really valuable and worthy of being prized; nay, they
are wont to say that he who gives quickly gives twice." "They say
also," said Camilla, "that what costs little is valued less." "That
saying does not hold good in your case," replied Leonela, "for love,
as I have heard say, sometimes flies and sometimes walks; with this
one it runs, with that it moves slowly; some it cools, others it
burns; some it wounds, others it slays; it begins the course of its
desires, and at the same moment completes and ends it; in the morning
it will lay siege to a fortress and by night will have taken it, for
there is no power that can resist it; so what are you in dread of,
what do you fear, when the same must have befallen Lothario, love
having chosen the absence of my lord as the instrument for subduing
you? and it was absolutely necessary to complete then what love had
resolved upon, without affording the time to let Anselmo return and by
his presence compel the work to be left unfinished; for love has no
better agent for carrying out his designs than opportunity; and of
opportunity he avails himself in all his feats, especially at the
outset. All this I know well myself, more by experience than by
hearsay, and some day, senora, I will enlighten you on the subject,
for I am of your flesh and blood too. Moreover, lady Camilla, you did
not surrender yourself or yield so quickly but that first you saw
Lothario's whole soul in his eyes, in his sighs, in his words, his
promises and his gifts, and by it and his good qualities perceived how
worthy he was of your love. This, then, being the case, let not these
scrupulous and prudish ideas trouble your imagination, but be assured
that Lothario prizes you as you do him, and rest content and satisfied
that as you are caught in the noose of love it is one of worth and
merit that has taken you, and one that has not only the four S's that
they say true lovers ought to have, but a complete alphabet; only
listen to me and you will see how I can repeat it by rote. He is to my
eyes and thinking, Amiable, Brave, Courteous, Distinguished, Elegant,
Fond, Gay, Honourable, Illustrious, Loyal, Manly, Noble, Open, Polite,
Quickwitted, Rich, and the S's according to the saying, and then
Tender, Veracious: X does not suit him, for it is a rough letter; Y
has been given already; and Z Zealous for your honour." Camilla
laughed at her maid's alphabet, and perceived her to be more
experienced in love affairs than she said, which she admitted,
confessing to Camilla that she had love passages with a young man of
good birth of the same city. Camilla was uneasy at this, dreading lest
it might prove the means of endangering her honour, and asked whether
her intrigue had gone beyond words, and she with little shame and much
effrontery said it had; for certain it is that ladies' imprudences
make servants shameless, who, when they see their mistresses make a
false step, think nothing of going astray themselves, or of its being
known. All that Camilla could do was to entreat Leonela to say nothing
about her doings to him whom she called her lover, and to conduct her
own affairs secretly lest they should come to the knowledge of Anselmo
or of Lothario. Leonela said she would, but kept her word in such a
way that she confirmed Camilla's apprehension of losing her reputation
through her means; for this abandoned and bold Leonela, as soon as she
perceived that her mistress's demeanour was not what it was wont to
be, had the audacity to introduce her lover into the house, confident
that even if her mistress saw him she would not dare to expose him;
for the sins of mistresses entail this mischief among others; they
make themselves the slaves of their own servants, and are obliged to
hide their laxities and depravities; as was the case with Camilla, who
though she perceived, not once but many times, that Leonela was with
her lover in some room of the house, not only did not dare to chide
her, but afforded her opportunities for concealing him and removed all
difficulties, lest he should be seen by her husband. She was unable,
however, to prevent him from being seen on one occasion, as he sallied
forth at daybreak, by Lothario, who, not knowing who he was, at first
took him for a spectre; but, as soon as he saw him hasten away,
muffling his face with his cloak and concealing himself carefully and
cautiously, he rejected this foolish idea, and adopted another, which
would have been the ruin of all had not Camilla found a remedy. It did
not occur to Lothario that this man he had seen issuing at such an
untimely hour from Anselmo's house could have entered it on Leonela's
account, nor did he even remember there was such a person as Leonela;
all he thought was that as Camilla had been light and yielding with
him, so she had been with another; for this further penalty the erring
woman's sin brings with it, that her honour is distrusted even by him
to whose overtures and persuasions she has yielded; and he believes
her to have surrendered more easily to others, and gives implicit
credence to every suspicion that comes into his mind. All Lothario's
good sense seems to have failed him at this juncture; all his prudent
maxims escaped his memory; for without once reflecting rationally, and
without more ado, in his impatience and in the blindness of the
jealous rage that gnawed his heart, and dying to revenge himself upon
Camilla, who had done him no wrong, before Anselmo had risen he
hastened to him and said to him, "Know, Anselmo, that for several days
past I have been struggling with myself, striving to withhold from
thee what it is no longer possible or right that I should conceal from
thee. Know that Camilla's fortress has surrendered and is ready to
submit to my will; and if I have been slow to reveal this fact to
thee, it was in order to see if it were some light caprice of hers, or
if she sought to try me and ascertain if the love I began to make to
her with thy permission was made with a serious intention. I thought,
too, that she, if she were what she ought to be, and what we both
believed her, would have ere this given thee information of my
addresses; but seeing that she delays, I believe the truth of the
promise she has given me that the next time thou art absent from the
house she will grant me an interview in the closet where thy jewels
are kept (and it was true that Camilla used to meet him there); but I
do not wish thee to rush precipitately to take vengeance, for the sin
is as yet only committed in intention, and Camilla's may change
perhaps between this and the appointed time, and repentance spring up
in its place. As hitherto thou hast always followed my advice wholly
or in part, follow and observe this that I will give thee now, so
that, without mistake, and with mature deliberation, thou mayest
satisfy thyself as to what may seem the best course; pretend to absent
thyself for two or three days as thou hast been wont to do on other
occasions, and contrive to hide thyself in the closet; for the
tapestries and other things there afford great facilities for thy
concealment, and then thou wilt see with thine own eyes and I with
mine what Camilla's purpose may be. And if it be a guilty one, which
may be feared rather than expected, with silence, prudence, and
discretion thou canst thyself become the instrument of punishment for
the wrong done thee." Anselmo was amazed, overwhelmed, and astounded
at the words of Lothario, which came upon him at a time when he least
expected to hear them, for he now looked upon Camilla as having
triumphed over the pretended attacks of Lothario, and was beginning to
enjoy the glory of her victory. He remained silent for a considerable
time, looking on the ground with fixed gaze, and at length said, "Thou
hast behaved, Lothario, as I expected of thy friendship: I will follow
thy advice in everything; do as thou wilt, and keep this secret as
thou seest it should be kept in circumstances so unlooked for."
Lothario gave him his word, but after leaving him he repented
altogether of what he had said to him, perceiving how foolishly he had
acted, as he might have revenged himself upon Camilla in some less
cruel and degrading way. He cursed his want of sense, condemned his
hasty resolution, and knew not what course to take to undo the
mischief or find some ready escape from it. At last he decided upon
revealing all to Camilla, and, as there was no want of opportunity for
doing so, he found her alone the same day; but she, as soon as she had
the chance of speaking to him, said, "Lothario my friend, I must tell
thee I have a sorrow in my heart which fills it so that it seems ready
to burst; and it will be a wonder if it does not; for the audacity of
Leonela has now reached such a pitch that every night she conceals a
gallant of hers in this house and remains with him till morning, at
the expense of my reputation; inasmuch as it is open to anyone to
question it who may see him quitting my house at such unseasonable
hours; but what distresses me is that I cannot punish or chide her,
for her privity to our intrigue bridles my mouth and keeps me silent
about hers, while I am dreading that some catastrophe will come of
it." As Camilla said this Lothario at first imagined it was some
device to delude him into the idea that the man he had seen going out
was Leonela's lover and not hers; but when he saw how she wept and
suffered, and begged him to help her, he became convinced of the
truth, and the conviction completed his confusion and remorse;
however, he told Camilla not to distress herself, as he would take
measures to put a stop to the insolence of Leonela. At the same time
he told her what, driven by the fierce rage of jealousy, he had said
to Anselmo, and how he had arranged to hide himself in the closet that
he might there see plainly how little she preserved her fidelity to
him; and he entreated her pardon for this madness, and her advice as
to how to repair it, and escape safely from the intricate labyrinth in
which his imprudence had involved him. Camilla was struck with alarm
at hearing what Lothario said, and with much anger, and great good
sense, she reproved him and rebuked his base design and the foolish
and mischievous resolution he had made; but as woman has by nature a
nimbler wit than man for good and for evil, though it is apt to fail
when she sets herself deliberately to reason, Camilla on the spur of
the moment thought of a way to remedy what was to all appearance
irremediable, and told Lothario to contrive that the next day Anselmo
should conceal himself in the place he mentioned, for she hoped from
his concealment to obtain the means of their enjoying themselves for
the future without any apprehension; and without revealing her purpose
to him entirely she charged him to be careful, as soon as Anselmo was
concealed, to come to her when Leonela should call him, and to all she
said to him to answer as he would have answered had he not known that
Anselmo was listening. Lothario pressed her to explain her intention
fully, so that he might with more certainty and precaution take care
to do what he saw to be needful. "I tell you," said Camilla, "there is
nothing to take care of except to answer me what I shall ask you;" for
she did not wish to explain to him beforehand what she meant to do,
fearing lest he should be unwilling to follow out an idea which seemed
to her such a good one, and should try or devise some other less
practicable plan. Lothario then retired, and the next day Anselmo,
under pretence of going to his friend's country house, took his
departure, and then returned to conceal himself, which he was able to
do easily, as Camilla and Leonela took care to give him the
opportunity; and so he placed himself in hiding in the state of
agitation that it may be imagined he would feel who expected to see
the vitals of his honour laid bare before his eyes, and found himself
on the point of losing the supreme blessing he thought he possessed in
his beloved Camilla. Having made sure of Anselmo's being in his
hiding-place, Camilla and Leonela entered the closet, and the instant
she set foot within it Camilla said, with a deep sigh, "Ah! dear
Leonela, would it not be better, before I do what I am unwilling you
should know lest you should seek to prevent it, that you should take
Anselmo's dagger that I have asked of you and with it pierce this vile
heart of mine? But no; there is no reason why I should suffer the
punishment of another's fault. I will first know what it is that the
bold licentious eyes of Lothario have seen in me that could have
encouraged him to reveal to me a design so base as that which he has
disclosed regardless of his friend and of my honour. Go to the window,
Leonela, and call him, for no doubt he is in the street waiting to
carry out his vile project; but mine, cruel it may be, but honourable,
shall be carried out first." "Ah, senora," said the crafty Leonela,
who knew her part, "what is it you want to do with this dagger? Can it
be that you mean to take your own life, or Lothario's? for whichever
you mean to do, it will lead to the loss of your reputation and good
name. It is better to dissemble your wrong and not give this wicked
man the chance of entering the house now and finding us alone;
consider, senora, we are weak women and he is a man, and determined,
and as he comes with such a base purpose, blind and urged by passion,
perhaps before you can put yours into execution he may do what will be
worse for you than taking your life. Ill betide my master, Anselmo,
for giving such authority in his house to this shameless fellow! And
supposing you kill him, senora, as I suspect you mean to do, what
shall we do with him when he is dead?" "What, my friend?" replied
Camilla, "we shall leave him for Anselmo to bury him; for in reason it
will be to him a light labour to hide his own infamy under ground.
Summon him, make haste, for all the time I delay in taking vengeance
for my wrong seems to me an offence against the loyalty I owe my
husband." Anselmo was listening to all this, and every word that
Camilla uttered made him change his mind; but when he heard that it
was resolved to kill Lothario his first impulse was to come out and
show himself to avert such a disaster; but in his anxiety to see the
issue of a resolution so bold and virtuous he restrained himself,
intending to come forth in time to prevent the deed. At this moment
Camilla, throwing herself upon a bed that was close by, swooned away,
and Leonela began to weep bitterly, exclaiming, "Woe is me! that I
should be fated to have dying here in my arms the flower of virtue
upon earth, the crown of true wives, the pattern of chastity!" with
more to the same effect, so that anyone who heard her would have taken
her for the most tender-hearted and faithful handmaid in the world,
and her mistress for another persecuted Penelope. Camilla was not long
in recovering from her fainting fit and on coming to herself she said,
"Why do you not go, Leonela, to call hither that friend, the falsest
to his friend the sun ever shone upon or night concealed? Away, run,
haste, speed! lest the fire of my wrath burn itself out with delay,
and the righteous vengeance that I hope for melt away in menaces and
maledictions." "I am just going to call him, senora," said Leonela;
"but you must first give me that dagger, lest while I am gone you
should by means of it give cause to all who love you to weep all their
lives." "Go in peace, dear Leonela, I will not do so," said Camilla,
"for rash and foolish as I may be, to your mind, in defending my
honour, I am not going to be so much so as that Lucretia who they say
killed herself without having done anything wrong, and without having
first killed him on whom the guilt of her misfortune lay. I shall die,
if I am to die; but it must be after full vengeance upon him who has
brought me here to weep over audacity that no fault of mine gave birth
to." Leonela required much pressing before she would go to summon
Lothario, but at last she went, and while awaiting her return Camilla
continued, as if speaking to herself, "Good God! would it not have
been more prudent to have repulsed Lothario, as I have done many a
time before, than to allow him, as I am now doing, to think me
unchaste and vile, even for the short time I must wait until I
undeceive him? No doubt it would have been better; but I should not be
avenged, nor the honour of my husband vindicated, should he find so
clear and easy an escape from the strait into which his depravity has
led him. Let the traitor pay with his life for the temerity of his
wanton wishes, and let the world know (if haply it shall ever come to
know) that Camilla not only preserved her allegiance to her husband,
but avenged him of the man who dared to wrong him. Still, I think it
might be better to disclose this to Anselmo. But then I have called
his attention to it in the letter I wrote to him in the country, and,
if he did nothing to prevent the mischief I there pointed out to him,
I suppose it was that from pure goodness of heart and trustfulness he
would not and could not believe that any thought against his honour
could harbour in the breast of so stanch a friend; nor indeed did I
myself believe it for many days, nor should I have ever believed it if
his insolence had not gone so far as to make it manifest by open
presents, lavish promises, and ceaseless tears. But why do I argue
thus? Does a bold determination stand in need of arguments? Surely
not. Then traitors avaunt! Vengeance to my aid! Let the false one
come, approach, advance, die, yield up his life, and then befall what
may. Pure I came to him whom Heaven bestowed upon me, pure I shall
leave him; and at the worst bathed in my own chaste blood and in the
foul blood of the falsest friend that friendship ever saw in the
world;" and as she uttered these words she paced the room holding the
unsheathed dagger, with such irregular and disordered steps, and such
gestures that one would have supposed her to have lost her senses, and
taken her for some violent desperado instead of a delicate woman.
Anselmo, hidden behind some tapestries where he had concealed himself,
beheld and was amazed at all, and already felt that what he had seen
and heard was a sufficient answer to even greater suspicions; and he
would have been now well pleased if the proof afforded by Lothario's
coming were dispensed with, as he feared some sudden mishap; but as he
was on the point of showing himself and coming forth to embrace and
undeceive his wife he paused as he saw Leonela returning, leading
Lothario. Camilla when she saw him, drawing a long line in front of
her on the floor with the dagger, said to him, "Lothario, pay
attention to what I say to thee: if by any chance thou darest to cross
this line thou seest, or even approach it, the instant I see thee
attempt it that same instant will I pierce my bosom with this dagger
that I hold in my hand; and before thou answerest me a word desire
thee to listen to a few from me, and afterwards thou shalt reply as
may please thee. First, I desire thee to tell me, Lothario, if thou
knowest my husband Anselmo, and in what light thou regardest him; and
secondly I desire to know if thou knowest me too. Answer me this,
without embarrassment or reflecting deeply what thou wilt answer, for
they are no riddles I put to thee." Lothario was not so dull but that
from the first moment when Camilla directed him to make Anselmo hide
himself he understood what she intended to do, and therefore he fell
in with her idea so readily and promptly that between them they made
the imposture look more true than truth; so he answered her thus: "I
did not think, fair Camilla, that thou wert calling me to ask
questions so remote from the object with which I come; but if it is to
defer the promised reward thou art doing so, thou mightst have put it
off still longer, for the longing for happiness gives the more
distress the nearer comes the hope of gaining it; but lest thou
shouldst say that I do not answer thy questions, I say that I know thy
husband Anselmo, and that we have known each other from our earliest
years; I will not speak of what thou too knowest, of our friendship,
that I may not compel myself to testify against the wrong that love,
the mighty excuse for greater errors, makes me inflict upon him. Thee
I know and hold in the same estimation as he does, for were it not so
I had not for a lesser prize acted in opposition to what I owe to my
station and the holy laws of true friendship, now broken and violated
by me through that powerful enemy, love." "If thou dost confess that,"
returned Camilla, "mortal enemy of all that rightly deserves to be
loved, with what face dost thou dare to come before one whom thou
knowest to be the mirror wherein he is reflected on whom thou shouldst
look to see how unworthily thou him? But, woe is me, I now comprehend
what has made thee give so little heed to what thou owest to thyself;
it must have been some freedom of mine, for I will not call it
immodesty, as it did not proceed from any deliberate intention, but
from some heedlessness such as women are guilty of through
inadvertence when they think they have no occasion for reserve. But
tell me, traitor, when did I by word or sign give a reply to thy
prayers that could awaken in thee a shadow of hope of attaining thy
base wishes? When were not thy professions of love sternly and
scornfully rejected and rebuked? When were thy frequent pledges and
still more frequent gifts believed or accepted? But as I am persuaded
that no one can long persevere in the attempt to win love unsustained
by some hope, I am willing to attribute to myself the blame of thy
assurance, for no doubt some thoughtlessness of mine has all this time
fostered thy hopes; and therefore will I punish myself and inflict
upon myself the penalty thy guilt deserves. And that thou mayest see
that being so relentless to myself I cannot possibly be otherwise to
thee, I have summoned thee to be a witness of the sacrifice I mean to
offer to the injured honour of my honoured husband, wronged by thee
with all the assiduity thou wert capable of, and by me too through
want of caution in avoiding every occasion, if I have given any, of
encouraging and sanctioning thy base designs. Once more I say the
suspicion in my mind that some imprudence of mine has engendered these
lawless thoughts in thee, is what causes me most distress and what I
desire most to punish with my own hands, for were any other instrument
of punishment employed my error might become perhaps more widely
known; but before I do so, in my death I mean to inflict death, and
take with me one that will fully satisfy my longing for the revenge I
hope for and have; for I shall see, wheresoever it may be that I go,
the penalty awarded by inflexible, unswerving justice on him who has
placed me in a position so desperate." As she uttered these words,
with incredible energy and swiftness she flew upon Lothario with the
naked dagger, so manifestly bent on burying it in his breast that he
was almost uncertain whether these demonstrations were real or
feigned, for he was obliged to have recourse to all his skill and
strength to prevent her from striking him; and with such reality did
she act this strange farce and mystification that, to give it a colour
of truth, she determined to stain it with her own blood; for
perceiving, or pretending, that she could not wound Lothario, she
said, "Fate, it seems, will not grant my just desire complete
satisfaction, but it will not be able to keep me from satisfying it
partially at least;" and making an effort to free the hand with the
dagger which Lothario held in his grasp, she released it, and
directing the point to a place where it could not inflict a deep
wound, she plunged it into her left side high up close to the
shoulder, and then allowed herself to fall to the ground as if in a
faint. Leonela and Lothario stood amazed and astounded at the
catastrophe, and seeing Camilla stretched on the ground and bathed in
her blood they were still uncertain as to the true nature of the act.
Lothario, terrified and breathless, ran in haste to pluck out the
dagger; but when he saw how slight the wound was he was relieved of
his fears and once more admired the subtlety, coolness, and ready wit
of the fair Camilla; and the better to support the part he had to play
he began to utter profuse and doleful lamentations over her body as if
she were dead, invoking maledictions not only on himself but also on
him who had been the means of placing him in such a position: and
knowing that his friend Anselmo heard him he spoke in such a way as to
make a listener feel much more pity for him than for Camilla, even
though he supposed her dead. Leonela took her up in her arms and laid
her on the bed, entreating Lothario to go in quest of some one to
attend to her wound in secret, and at the same time asking his advice
and opinion as to what they should say to Anselmo about his lady's
wound if he should chance to return before it was healed. He replied
they might say what they liked, for he was not in a state to give
advice that would be of any use; all he could tell her was to try and
stanch the blood, as he was going where he should never more be seen;
and with every appearance of deep grief and sorrow he left the house;
but when he found himself alone, and where there was nobody to see
him, he crossed himself unceasingly, lost in wonder at the adroitness
of Camilla and the consistent acting of Leonela. He reflected how
convinced Anselmo would be that he had a second Portia for a wife, and
he looked forward anxiously to meeting him in order to rejoice
together over falsehood and truth the most craftily veiled that could
be imagined. Leonela, as he told her, stanched her lady's blood, which
was no more than sufficed to support her deception; and washing the
wound with a little wine she bound it up to the best of her skill,
talking all the time she was tending her in a strain that, even if
nothing else had been said before, would have been enough to assure
Anselmo that he had in Camilla a model of purity. To Leonela's words
Camilla added her own, calling herself cowardly and wanting in spirit,
since she had not enough at the time she had most need of it to rid
herself of the life she so much loathed. She asked her attendant's
advice as to whether or not she ought to inform her beloved husband of
all that had happened, but the other bade her say nothing about it, as
she would lay upon him the obligation of taking vengeance on Lothario,
which he could not do but at great risk to himself; and it was the
duty of a true wife not to give her husband provocation to quarrel,
but, on the contrary, to remove it as far as possible from him.
Camilla replied that she believed she was right and that she would
follow her advice, but at any rate it would be well to consider how
she was to explain the wound to Anselmo, for he could not help seeing
it; to which Leonela answered that she did not know how to tell a lie
even in jest. "How then can I know, my dear?" said Camilla, "for I
should not dare to forge or keep up a falsehood if my life depended on
it. If we can think of no escape from this difficulty, it will be
better to tell him the plain truth than that he should find us out in
an untrue story." "Be not uneasy, senora," said Leonela; "between this
and to-morrow I will think of what we must say to him, and perhaps the
wound being where it is it can be hidden from his sight, and Heaven
will be pleased to aid us in a purpose so good and honourable. Compose
yourself, senora, and endeavour to calm your excitement lest my lord
find you agitated; and leave the rest to my care and God's, who always
supports good intentions." Anselmo had with the deepest attention
listened to and seen played out the tragedy of the death of his
honour, which the performers acted with such wonderfully effective
truth that it seemed as if they had become the realities of the parts
they played. He longed for night and an opportunity of escaping from
the house to go and see his good friend Lothario, and with him give
vent to his joy over the precious pearl he had gained in having
established his wife's purity. Both mistress and maid took care to
give him time and opportunity to get away, and taking advantage of it
he made his escape, and at once went in quest of Lothario, and it
would be impossible to describe how he embraced him when he found him,
and the things he said to him in the joy of his heart, and the praises
he bestowed upon Camilla; all which Lothario listened to without being
able to show any pleasure, for he could not forget how deceived his
friend was, and how dishonourably he had wronged him; and though
Anselmo could see that Lothario was not glad, still he imagined it was
only because he had left Camilla wounded and had been himself the
cause of it; and so among other things he told him not to be
distressed about Camilla's accident, for, as they had agreed to hide
it from him, the wound was evidently trifling; and that being so, he
had no cause for fear, but should henceforward be of good cheer and
rejoice with him, seeing that by his means and adroitness he found
himself raised to the greatest height of happiness that he could have
ventured to hope for, and desired no better pastime than making verses
in praise of Camilla that would preserve her name for all time to
come. Lothario commended his purpose, and promised on his own part to
aid him in raising a monument so glorious. And so Anselmo was left the
most charmingly hoodwinked man there could be in the world. He
himself, persuaded he was conducting the instrument of his glory, led
home by the hand him who had been the utter destruction of his good
name; whom Camilla received with averted countenance, though with
smiles in her heart. The deception was carried on for some time, until
at the end of a few months Fortune turned her wheel and the guilt
which had been until then so skilfully concealed was published abroad,
and Anselmo paid with his life the penalty of his ill-advised
curiosity. CHAPTER XXXV. WHICH TREATS OF THE HEROIC AND PRODIGIOUS
BATTLE DON QUIXOTE HAD WITH CERTAIN SKINS OF RED WINE, AND BRINGS THE
NOVEL OF "THE ILL-ADVISED CURIOSITY" TO A CLOSE There remained but
little more of the novel to be read, when Sancho Panza burst forth in
wild excitement from the garret where Don Quixote was lying, shouting,
"Run, sirs! quick; and help my master, who is in the thick of the
toughest and stiffest battle I ever laid eyes on. By the living God he
has given the giant, the enemy of my lady the Princess Micomicona,
such a slash that he has sliced his head clean off as if it were a
turnip." "What are you talking about, brother?" said the curate,
pausing as he was about to read the remainder of the novel. "Are you
in your senses, Sancho? How the devil can it be as you say, when the
giant is two thousand leagues away?" Here they heard a loud noise in
the chamber, and Don Quixote shouting out, "Stand, thief, brigand,
villain; now I have got thee, and thy scimitar shall not avail thee!"
And then it seemed as though he were slashing vigorously at the wall.
"Don't stop to listen," said Sancho, "but go in and part them or help
my master: though there is no need of that now, for no doubt the giant
is dead by this time and giving account to God of his past wicked
life; for I saw the blood flowing on the ground, and the head cut off
and fallen on one side, and it is as big as a large wine-skin." "May I
die," said the landlord at this, "if Don Quixote or Don Devil has not
been slashing some of the skins of red wine that stand full at his
bed's head, and the spilt wine must be what this good fellow takes for
blood;" and so saying he went into the room and the rest after him,
and there they found Don Quixote in the strangest costume in the
world. He was in his shirt, which was not long enough in front to
cover his thighs completely and was six fingers shorter behind; his
legs were very long and lean, covered with hair, and anything but
clean; on his head he had a little greasy red cap that belonged to the
host, round his left arm he had rolled the blanket of the bed, to
which Sancho, for reasons best known to himself, owed a grudge, and in
his right hand he held his unsheathed sword, with which he was
slashing about on all sides, uttering exclamations as if he were
actually fighting some giant: and the best of it was his eyes were not
open, for he was fast asleep, and dreaming that he was doing battle
with the giant. For his imagination was so wrought upon by the
adventure he was going to accomplish, that it made him dream he had
already reached the kingdom of Micomicon, and was engaged in combat
with his enemy; and believing he was laying on the giant, he had given
so many sword cuts to the skins that the whole room was full of wine.
On seeing this the landlord was so enraged that he fell on Don
Quixote, and with his clenched fist began to pummel him in such a way,
that if Cardenio and the curate had not dragged him off, he would have
brought the war of the giant to an end. But in spite of all the poor
gentleman never woke until the barber brought a great pot of cold
water from the well and flung it with one dash all over his body, on
which Don Quixote woke up, but not so completely as to understand what
was the matter. Dorothea, seeing how short and slight his attire was,
would not go in to witness the battle between her champion and her
opponent. As for Sancho, he went searching all over the floor for the
head of the giant, and not finding it he said, "I see now that it's
all enchantment in this house; for the last time, on this very spot
where I am now, I got ever so many thumps without knowing who gave
them to me, or being able to see anybody; and now this head is not to
be seen anywhere about, though I saw it cut off with my own eyes and
the blood running from the body as if from a fountain." "What blood
and fountains are you talking about, enemy of God and his saints?"
said the landlord. "Don't you see, you thief, that the blood and the
fountain are only these skins here that have been stabbed and the red
wine swimming all over the room?--and I wish I saw the soul of him
that stabbed them swimming in hell." "I know nothing about that," said
Sancho; "all I know is it will be my bad luck that through not finding
this head my county will melt away like salt in water;"--for Sancho
awake was worse than his master asleep, so much had his master's
promises addled his wits. The landlord was beside himself at the
coolness of the squire and the mischievous doings of the master, and
swore it should not be like the last time when they went without
paying; and that their privileges of chivalry should not hold good
this time to let one or other of them off without paying, even to the
cost of the plugs that would have to be put to the damaged wine-skins.
The curate was holding Don Quixote's hands, who, fancying he had now
ended the adventure and was in the presence of the Princess
Micomicona, knelt before the curate and said, "Exalted and beauteous
lady, your highness may live from this day forth fearless of any harm
this base being could do you; and I too from this day forth am
released from the promise I gave you, since by the help of God on high
and by the favour of her by whom I live and breathe, I have fulfilled
it so successfully." "Did not I say so?" said Sancho on hearing this.
"You see I wasn't drunk; there you see my master has already salted
the giant; there's no doubt about the bulls; my county is all right!"
Who could have helped laughing at the absurdities of the pair, master
and man? And laugh they did, all except the landlord, who cursed
himself; but at length the barber, Cardenio, and the curate contrived
with no small trouble to get Don Quixote on the bed, and he fell
asleep with every appearance of excessive weariness. They left him to
sleep, and came out to the gate of the inn to console Sancho Panza on
not having found the head of the giant; but much more work had they to
appease the landlord, who was furious at the sudden death of his
wine-skins; and said the landlady half scolding, half crying, "At an
evil moment and in an unlucky hour he came into my house, this
knight-errant--would that I had never set eyes on him, for dear he has
cost me; the last time he went off with the overnight score against
him for supper, bed, straw, and barley, for himself and his squire and
a hack and an ass, saying he was a knight adventurer--God send unlucky
adventures to him and all the adventurers in the world--and therefore
not bound to pay anything, for it was so settled by the
knight-errantry tariff: and then, all because of him, came the other
gentleman and carried off my tail, and gives it back more than two
cuartillos the worse, all stripped of its hair, so that it is no use
for my husband's purpose; and then, for a finishing touch to all, to
burst my wine-skins and spill my wine! I wish I saw his own blood
spilt! But let him not deceive himself, for, by the bones of my father
and the shade of my mother, they shall pay me down every quarts; or my
name is not what it is, and I am not my father's daughter." All this
and more to the same effect the landlady delivered with great
irritation, and her good maid Maritornes backed her up, while the
daughter held her peace and smiled from time to time. The curate
smoothed matters by promising to make good all losses to the best of
his power, not only as regarded the wine-skins but also the wine, and
above all the depreciation of the tail which they set such store by.
Dorothea comforted Sancho, telling him that she pledged herself, as
soon as it should appear certain that his master had decapitated the
giant, and she found herself peacefully established in her kingdom, to
bestow upon him the best county there was in it. With this Sancho
consoled himself, and assured the princess she might rely upon it that
he had seen the head of the giant, and more by token it had a beard
that reached to the girdle, and that if it was not to be seen now it
was because everything that happened in that house went by
enchantment, as he himself had proved the last time he had lodged
there. Dorothea said she fully believed it, and that he need not be
uneasy, for all would go well and turn out as he wished. All therefore
being appeased, the curate was anxious to go on with the novel, as he
saw there was but little more left to read. Dorothea and the others
begged him to finish it, and he, as he was willing to please them, and
enjoyed reading it himself, continued the tale in these words: The
result was, that from the confidence Anselmo felt in Camilla's virtue,
he lived happy and free from anxiety, and Camilla purposely looked
coldly on Lothario, that Anselmo might suppose her feelings towards
him to be the opposite of what they were; and the better to support
the position, Lothario begged to be excused from coming to the house,
as the displeasure with which Camilla regarded his presence was plain
to be seen. But the befooled Anselmo said he would on no account allow
such a thing, and so in a thousand ways he became the author of his
own dishonour, while he believed he was insuring his happiness.
Meanwhile the satisfaction with which Leonela saw herself empowered to
carry on her amour reached such a height that, regardless of
everything else, she followed her inclinations unrestrainedly, feeling
confident that her mistress would screen her, and even show her how to
manage it safely. At last one night Anselmo heard footsteps in
Leonela's room, and on trying to enter to see who it was, he found
that the door was held against him, which made him all the more
determined to open it; and exerting his strength he forced it open,
and entered the room in time to see a man leaping through the window
into the street. He ran quickly to seize him or discover who he was,
but he was unable to effect either purpose, for Leonela flung her arms
round him crying, "Be calm, senor; do not give way to passion or
follow him who has escaped from this; he belongs to me, and in fact he
is my husband." Anselmo would not believe it, but blind with rage drew
a dagger and threatened to stab Leonela, bidding her tell the truth or
he would kill her. She, in her fear, not knowing what she was saying,
exclaimed, "Do not kill me, senor, for I can tell you things more
important than any you can imagine." "Tell me then at once or thou
diest," said Anselmo. "It would be impossible for me now," said
Leonela, "I am so agitated: leave me till to-morrow, and then you
shall hear from me what will fill you with astonishment; but rest
assured that he who leaped through the window is a young man of this
city, who has given me his promise to become my husband." Anselmo was
appeased with this, and was content to wait the time she asked of him,
for he never expected to hear anything against Camilla, so satisfied
and sure of her virtue was he; and so he quitted the room, and left
Leonela locked in, telling her she should not come out until she had
told him all she had to make known to him. He went at once to see
Camilla, and tell her, as he did, all that had passed between him and
her handmaid, and the promise she had given him to inform him matters
of serious importance. There is no need of saying whether Camilla was
agitated or not, for so great was her fear and dismay, that, making
sure, as she had good reason to do, that Leonela would tell Anselmo
all she knew of her faithlessness, she had not the courage to wait and
see if her suspicions were confirmed; and that same night, as soon as
she thought that Anselmo was asleep, she packed up the most valuable
jewels she had and some money, and without being observed by anybody
escaped from the house and betook herself to Lothario's, to whom she
related what had occurred, imploring him to convey her to some place
of safety or fly with her where they might be safe from Anselmo. The
state of perplexity to which Camilla reduced Lothario was such that he
was unable to utter a word in reply, still less to decide upon what he
should do. At length he resolved to conduct her to a convent of which
a sister of his was prioress; Camilla agreed to this, and with the
speed which the circumstances demanded, Lothario took her to the
convent and left her there, and then himself quitted the city without
letting anyone know of his departure. As soon as daylight came
Anselmo, without missing Camilla from his side, rose cager to learn
what Leonela had to tell him, and hastened to the room where he had
locked her in. He opened the door, entered, but found no Leonela; all
he found was some sheets knotted to the window, a plain proof that she
had let herself down from it and escaped. He returned, uneasy, to tell
Camilla, but not finding her in bed or anywhere in the house he was
lost in amazement. He asked the servants of the house about her, but
none of them could give him any explanation. As he was going in search
of Camilla it happened by chance that he observed her boxes were lying
open, and that the greater part of her jewels were gone; and now he
became fully aware of his disgrace, and that Leonela was not the cause
of his misfortune; and, just as he was, without delaying to dress
himself completely, he repaired, sad at heart and dejected, to his
friend Lothario to make known his sorrow to him; but when he failed to
find him and the servants reported that he had been absent from his
house all night and had taken with him all the money he had, he felt
as though he were losing his senses; and to make all complete on
returning to his own house he found it deserted and empty, not one of
all his servants, male or female, remaining in it. He knew not what to
think, or say, or do, and his reason seemed to be deserting him little
by little. He reviewed his position, and saw himself in a moment left
without wife, friend, or servants, abandoned, he felt, by the heaven
above him, and more than all robbed of his honour, for in Camilla's
disappearance he saw his own ruin. After long reflection he resolved
at last to go to his friend's village, where he had been staying when
he afforded opportunities for the contrivance of this complication of
misfortune. He locked the doors of his house, mounted his horse, and
with a broken spirit set out on his journey; but he had hardly gone
half-way when, harassed by his reflections, he had to dismount and tie
his horse to a tree, at the foot of which he threw himself, giving
vent to piteous heartrending sighs; and there he remained till nearly
nightfall, when he observed a man approaching on horseback from the
city, of whom, after saluting him, he asked what was the news in
Florence. The citizen replied, "The strangest that have been heard for
many a day; for it is reported abroad that Lothario, the great friend
of the wealthy Anselmo, who lived at San Giovanni, carried off last
night Camilla, the wife of Anselmo, who also has disappeared. All this
has been told by a maid-servant of Camilla's, whom the governor found
last night lowering herself by a sheet from the windows of Anselmo's
house. I know not indeed, precisely, how the affair came to pass; all
I know is that the whole city is wondering at the occurrence, for no
one could have expected a thing of the kind, seeing the great and
intimate friendship that existed between them, so great, they say,
that they were called 'The Two Friends.'" "Is it known at all," said
Anselmo, "what road Lothario and Camilla took?" "Not in the least,"
said the citizen, "though the governor has been very active in
searching for them." "God speed you, senor," said Anselmo. "God be
with you," said the citizen and went his way. This disastrous
intelligence almost robbed Anselmo not only of his senses but of his
life. He got up as well as he was able and reached the house of his
friend, who as yet knew nothing of his misfortune, but seeing him come
pale, worn, and haggard, perceived that he was suffering some heavy
affliction. Anselmo at once begged to be allowed to retire to rest,
and to be given writing materials. His wish was complied with and he
was left lying down and alone, for he desired this, and even that the
door should be locked. Finding himself alone he so took to heart the
thought of his misfortune that by the signs of death he felt within
him he knew well his life was drawing to a close, and therefore he
resolved to leave behind him a declaration of the cause of his strange
end. He began to write, but before he had put down all he meant to
say, his breath failed him and he yielded up his life, a victim to the
suffering which his ill-advised curiosity had entailed upon him. The
master of the house observing that it was now late and that Anselmo
did not call, determined to go in and ascertain if his indisposition
was increasing, and found him lying on his face, his body partly in
the bed, partly on the writing-table, on which he lay with the written
paper open and the pen still in his hand. Having first called to him
without receiving any answer, his host approached him, and taking him
by the hand, found that it was cold, and saw that he was dead. Greatly
surprised and distressed he summoned the household to witness the sad
fate which had befallen Anselmo; and then he read the paper, the
handwriting of which he recognised as his, and which contained these
words: "A foolish and ill-advised desire has robbed me of life. If the
news of my death should reach the ears of Camilla, let her know that I
forgive her, for she was not bound to perform miracles, nor ought I to
have required her to perform them; and since I have been the author of
my own dishonour, there is no reason why-" So far Anselmo had written,
and thus it was plain that at this point, before he could finish what
he had to say, his life came to an end. The next day his friend sent
intelligence of his death to his relatives, who had already
ascertained his misfortune, as well as the convent where Camilla lay
almost on the point of accompanying her husband on that inevitable
journey, not on account of the tidings of his death, but because of
those she received of her lover's departure. Although she saw herself
a widow, it is said she refused either to quit the convent or take the
veil, until, not long afterwards, intelligence reached her that
Lothario had been killed in a battle in which M. de Lautrec had been
recently engaged with the Great Captain Gonzalo Fernandez de Cordova
in the kingdom of Naples, whither her too late repentant lover had
repaired. On learning this Camilla took the veil, and shortly
afterwards died, worn out by grief and melancholy. This was the end of
all three, an end that came of a thoughtless beginning. "I like this
novel," said the curate; "but I cannot persuade myself of its truth;
and if it has been invented, the author's invention is faulty, for it
is impossible to imagine any husband so foolish as to try such a
costly experiment as Anselmo's. If it had been represented as
occurring between a gallant and his mistress it might pass; but
between husband and wife there is something of an impossibility about
it. As to the way in which the story is told, however, I have no fault
to find." CHAPTER XXXVI. WHICH TREATS OF MORE CURIOUS INCIDENTS THAT
OCCURRED AT THE INN Just at that instant the landlord, who was
standing at the gate of the inn, exclaimed, "Here comes a fine troop
of guests; if they stop here we may say gaudeamus." "What are they?"
said Cardenio. "Four men," said the landlord, "riding a la jineta,
with lances and bucklers, and all with black veils, and with them
there is a woman in white on a side-saddle, whose face is also veiled,
and two attendants on foot." "Are they very near?" said the curate.
"So near," answered the landlord, "that here they come." Hearing this
Dorothea covered her face, and Cardenio retreated into Don Quixote's
room, and they hardly had time to do so before the whole party the
host had described entered the inn, and the four that were on
horseback, who were of highbred appearance and bearing, dismounted,
and came forward to take down the woman who rode on the side-saddle,
and one of them taking her in his arms placed her in a chair that
stood at the entrance of the room where Cardenio had hidden himself.
All this time neither she nor they had removed their veils or spoken a
word, only on sitting down on the chair the woman gave a deep sigh and
let her arms fall like one that was ill and weak. The attendants on
foot then led the horses away to the stable. Observing this the
curate, curious to know who these people in such a dress and
preserving such silence were, went to where the servants were standing
and put the question to one of them, who answered him. "Faith, sir, I
cannot tell you who they are, I only know they seem to be people of
distinction, particularly he who advanced to take the lady you saw in
his arms; and I say so because all the rest show him respect, and
nothing is done except what he directs and orders." "And the lady, who
is she?" asked the curate. "That I cannot tell you either," said the
servant, "for I have not seen her face all the way: I have indeed
heard her sigh many times and utter such groans that she seems to be
giving up the ghost every time; but it is no wonder if we do not know
more than we have told you, as my comrade and I have only been in
their company two days, for having met us on the road they begged and
persuaded us to accompany them to Andalusia, promising to pay us
well." "And have you heard any of them called by his name?" asked the
curate. "No, indeed," replied the servant; "they all preserve a
marvellous silence on the road, for not a sound is to be heard among
them except the poor lady's sighs and sobs, which make us pity her;
and we feel sure that wherever it is she is going, it is against her
will, and as far as one can judge from her dress she is a nun or, what
is more likely, about to become one; and perhaps it is because taking
the vows is not of her own free will, that she is so unhappy as she
seems to be." "That may well be," said the curate, and leaving them he
returned to where Dorothea was, who, hearing the veiled lady sigh,
moved by natural compassion drew near to her and said, "What are you
suffering from, senora? If it be anything that women are accustomed
and know how to relieve, I offer you my services with all my heart."
To this the unhappy lady made no reply; and though Dorothea repeated
her offers more earnestly she still kept silence, until the gentleman
with the veil, who, the servant said, was obeyed by the rest,
approached and said to Dorothea, "Do not give yourself the trouble,
senora, of making any offers to that woman, for it is her way to give
no thanks for anything that is done for her; and do not try to make
her answer unless you want to hear some lie from her lips." "I have
never told a lie," was the immediate reply of her who had been silent
until now; "on the contrary, it is because I am so truthful and so
ignorant of lying devices that I am now in this miserable condition;
and this I call you yourself to witness, for it is my unstained truth
that has made you false and a liar." Cardenio heard these words
clearly and distinctly, being quite close to the speaker, for there
was only the door of Don Quixote's room between them, and the instant
he did so, uttering a loud exclamation he cried, "Good God! what is
this I hear? What voice is this that has reached my ears?" Startled at
the voice the lady turned her head; and not seeing the speaker she
stood up and attempted to enter the room; observing which the
gentleman held her back, preventing her from moving a step. In her
agitation and sudden movement the silk with which she had covered her
face fell off and disclosed a countenance of incomparable and
marvellous beauty, but pale and terrified; for she kept turning her
eyes, everywhere she could direct her gaze, with an eagerness that
made her look as if she had lost her senses, and so marked that it
excited the pity of Dorothea and all who beheld her, though they knew
not what caused it. The gentleman grasped her firmly by the shoulders,
and being so fully occupied with holding her back, he was unable to
put a hand to his veil which was falling off, as it did at length
entirely, and Dorothea, who was holding the lady in her arms, raising
her eyes saw that he who likewise held her was her husband, Don
Fernando. The instant she recognised him, with a prolonged plaintive
cry drawn from the depths of her heart, she fell backwards fainting,
and but for the barber being close by to catch her in his arms, she
would have fallen completely to the ground. The curate at once
hastened to uncover her face and throw water on it, and as he did so
Don Fernando, for he it was who held the other in his arms, recognised
her and stood as if death-stricken by the sight; not, however,
relaxing his grasp of Luscinda, for it was she that was struggling to
release herself from his hold, having recognised Cardenio by his
voice, as he had recognised her. Cardenio also heard Dorothea's cry as
she fell fainting, and imagining that it came from his Luscinda burst
forth in terror from the room, and the first thing he saw was Don
Fernando with Luscinda in his arms. Don Fernando, too, knew Cardenio
at once; and all three, Luscinda, Cardenio, and Dorothea, stood in
silent amazement scarcely knowing what had happened to them. They
gazed at one another without speaking, Dorothea at Don Fernando, Don
Fernando at Cardenio, Cardenio at Luscinda, and Luscinda at Cardenio.
The first to break silence was Luscinda, who thus addressed Don
Fernando: "Leave me, Senor Don Fernando, for the sake of what you owe
to yourself; if no other reason will induce you, leave me to cling to
the wall of which I am the ivy, to the support from which neither your
importunities, nor your threats, nor your promises, nor your gifts
have been able to detach me. See how Heaven, by ways strange and
hidden from our sight, has brought me face to face with my true
husband; and well you know by dear-bought experience that death alone
will be able to efface him from my memory. May this plain declaration,
then, lead you, as you can do nothing else, to turn your love into
rage, your affection into resentment, and so to take my life; for if I
yield it up in the presence of my beloved husband I count it well
bestowed; it may be by my death he will be convinced that I kept my
faith to him to the last moment of life." Meanwhile Dorothea had come
to herself, and had heard Luscinda's words, by means of which she
divined who she was; but seeing that Don Fernando did not yet release
her or reply to her, summoning up her resolution as well as she could
she rose and knelt at his feet, and with a flood of bright and
touching tears addressed him thus: "If, my lord, the beams of that sun
that thou holdest eclipsed in thine arms did not dazzle and rob thine
eyes of sight thou wouldst have seen by this time that she who kneels
at thy feet is, so long as thou wilt have it so, the unhappy and
unfortunate Dorothea. I am that lowly peasant girl whom thou in thy
goodness or for thy pleasure wouldst raise high enough to call herself
thine; I am she who in the seclusion of innocence led a contented life
until at the voice of thy importunity, and thy true and tender
passion, as it seemed, she opened the gates of her modesty and
surrendered to thee the keys of her liberty; a gift received by thee
but thanklessly, as is clearly shown by my forced retreat to the place
where thou dost find me, and by thy appearance under the circumstances
in which I see thee. Nevertheless, I would not have thee suppose that
I have come here driven by my shame; it is only grief and sorrow at
seeing myself forgotten by thee that have led me. It was thy will to
make me thine, and thou didst so follow thy will, that now, even
though thou repentest, thou canst not help being mine. Bethink thee,
my lord, the unsurpassable affection I bear thee may compensate for
the beauty and noble birth for which thou wouldst desert me. Thou
canst not be the fair Luscinda's because thou art mine, nor can she be
thine because she is Cardenio's; and it will be easier, remember, to
bend thy will to love one who adores thee, than to lead one to love
thee who abhors thee now. Thou didst address thyself to my simplicity,
thou didst lay siege to my virtue, thou wert not ignorant of my
station, well dost thou know how I yielded wholly to thy will; there
is no ground or reason for thee to plead deception, and if it be so,
as it is, and if thou art a Christian as thou art a gentleman, why
dost thou by such subterfuges put off making me as happy at last as
thou didst at first? And if thou wilt not have me for what I am, thy
true and lawful wife, at least take and accept me as thy slave, for so
long as I am thine I will count myself happy and fortunate. Do not by
deserting me let my shame become the talk of the gossips in the
streets; make not the old age of my parents miserable; for the loyal
services they as faithful vassals have ever rendered thine are not
deserving of such a return; and if thou thinkest it will debase thy
blood to mingle it with mine, reflect that there is little or no
nobility in the world that has not travelled the same road, and that
in illustrious lineages it is not the woman's blood that is of
account; and, moreover, that true nobility consists in virtue, and if
thou art wanting in that, refusing me what in justice thou owest me,
then even I have higher claims to nobility than thine. To make an end,
senor, these are my last words to thee: whether thou wilt, or wilt
not, I am thy wife; witness thy words, which must not and ought not to
be false, if thou dost pride thyself on that for want of which thou
scornest me; witness the pledge which thou didst give me, and witness
Heaven, which thou thyself didst call to witness the promise thou
hadst made me; and if all this fail, thy own conscience will not fail
to lift up its silent voice in the midst of all thy gaiety, and
vindicate the truth of what I say and mar thy highest pleasure and
enjoyment." All this and more the injured Dorothea delivered with such
earnest feeling and such tears that all present, even those who came
with Don Fernando, were constrained to join her in them. Don Fernando
listened to her without replying, until, ceasing to speak, she gave
way to such sobs and sighs that it must have been a heart of brass
that was not softened by the sight of so great sorrow. Luscinda stood
regarding her with no less compassion for her sufferings than
admiration for her intelligence and beauty, and would have gone to her
to say some words of comfort to her, but was prevented by Don
Fernando's grasp which held her fast. He, overwhelmed with confusion
and astonishment, after regarding Dorothea for some moments with a
fixed gaze, opened his arms, and, releasing Luscinda, exclaimed: "Thou
hast conquered, fair Dorothea, thou hast conquered, for it is
impossible to have the heart to deny the united force of so many
truths." Luscinda in her feebleness was on the point of falling to the
ground when Don Fernando released her, but Cardenio, who stood near,
having retreated behind Don Fernando to escape recognition, casting
fear aside and regardless of what might happen, ran forward to support
her, and said as he clasped her in his arms, "If Heaven in its
compassion is willing to let thee rest at last, mistress of my heart,
true, constant, and fair, nowhere canst thou rest more safely than in
these arms that now receive thee, and received thee before when
fortune permitted me to call thee mine." At these words Luscinda
looked up at Cardenio, at first beginning to recognise him by his
voice and then satisfying herself by her eyes that it was he, and
hardly knowing what she did, and heedless of all considerations of
decorum, she flung her arms around his neck and pressing her face
close to his, said, "Yes, my dear lord, you are the true master of
this your slave, even though adverse fate interpose again, and fresh
dangers threaten this life that hangs on yours." A strange sight was
this for Don Fernando and those that stood around, filled with
surprise at an incident so unlooked for. Dorothea fancied that Don
Fernando changed colour and looked as though he meant to take
vengeance on Cardenio, for she observed him put his hand to his sword;
and the instant the idea struck her, with wonderful quickness she
clasped him round the knees, and kissing them and holding him so as to
prevent his moving, she said, while her tears continued to flow, "What
is it thou wouldst do, my only refuge, in this unforeseen event? Thou
hast thy wife at thy feet, and she whom thou wouldst have for thy wife
is in the arms of her husband: reflect whether it will be right for
thee, whether it will be possible for thee to undo what Heaven has
done, or whether it will be becoming in thee to seek to raise her to
be thy mate who in spite of every obstacle, and strong in her truth
and constancy, is before thine eyes, bathing with the tears of love
the face and bosom of her lawful husband. For God's sake I entreat of
thee, for thine own I implore thee, let not this open manifestation
rouse thy anger; but rather so calm it as to allow these two lovers to
live in peace and quiet without any interference from thee so long as
Heaven permits them; and in so doing thou wilt prove the generosity of
thy lofty noble spirit, and the world shall see that with thee reason
has more influence than passion." All the time Dorothea was speaking,
Cardenio, though he held Luscinda in his arms, never took his eyes off
Don Fernando, determined, if he saw him make any hostile movement, to
try and defend himself and resist as best he could all who might
assail him, though it should cost him his life. But now Don Fernando's
friends, as well as the curate and the barber, who had been present
all the while, not forgetting the worthy Sancho Panza, ran forward and
gathered round Don Fernando, entreating him to have regard for the
tears of Dorothea, and not suffer her reasonable hopes to be
disappointed, since, as they firmly believed, what she said was but
the truth; and bidding him observe that it was not, as it might seem,
by accident, but by a special disposition of Providence that they had
all met in a place where no one could have expected a meeting. And the
curate bade him remember that only death could part Luscinda from
Cardenio; that even if some sword were to separate them they would
think their death most happy; and that in a case that admitted of no
remedy his wisest course was, by conquering and putting a constraint
upon himself, to show a generous mind, and of his own accord suffer
these two to enjoy the happiness Heaven had granted them. He bade him,
too, turn his eyes upon the beauty of Dorothea and he would see that
few if any could equal much less excel her; while to that beauty
should be added her modesty and the surpassing love she bore him. But
besides all this, he reminded him that if he prided himself on being a
gentleman and a Christian, he could not do otherwise than keep his
plighted word; and that in doing so he would obey God and meet the
approval of all sensible people, who know and recognised it to be the
privilege of beauty, even in one of humble birth, provided virtue
accompany it, to be able to raise itself to the level of any rank,
without any slur upon him who places it upon an equality with himself;
and furthermore that when the potent sway of passion asserts itself,
so long as there be no mixture of sin in it, he is not to be blamed
who gives way to it. To be brief, they added to these such other
forcible arguments that Don Fernando's manly heart, being after all
nourished by noble blood, was touched, and yielded to the truth which,
even had he wished it, he could not gainsay; and he showed his
submission, and acceptance of the good advice that had been offered to
him, by stooping down and embracing Dorothea, saying to her, "Rise,
dear lady, it is not right that what I hold in my heart should be
kneeling at my feet; and if until now I have shown no sign of what I
own, it may have been by Heaven's decree in order that, seeing the
constancy with which you love me, I may learn to value you as you
deserve. What I entreat of you is that you reproach me not with my
transgression and grievous wrong-doing; for the same cause and force
that drove me to make you mine impelled me to struggle against being
yours; and to prove this, turn and look at the eyes of the now happy
Luscinda, and you will see in them an excuse for all my errors: and as
she has found and gained the object of her desires, and I have found
in you what satisfies all my wishes, may she live in peace and
contentment as many happy years with her Cardenio, as on my knees I
pray Heaven to allow me to live with my Dorothea;" and with these
words he once more embraced her and pressed his face to hers with so
much tenderness that he had to take great heed to keep his tears from
completing the proof of his love and repentance in the sight of all.
Not so Luscinda, and Cardenio, and almost all the others, for they
shed so many tears, some in their own happiness, some at that of the
others, that one would have supposed a heavy calamity had fallen upon
them all. Even Sancho Panza was weeping; though afterwards he said he
only wept because he saw that Dorothea was not as he fancied the queen
Micomicona, of whom he expected such great favours. Their wonder as
well as their weeping lasted some time, and then Cardenio and Luscinda
went and fell on their knees before Don Fernando, returning him thanks
for the favour he had rendered them in language so grateful that he
knew not how to answer them, and raising them up embraced them with
every mark of affection and courtesy. He then asked Dorothea how she
had managed to reach a place so far removed from her own home, and she
in a few fitting words told all that she had previously related to
Cardenio, with which Don Fernando and his companions were so delighted
that they wished the story had been longer; so charmingly did Dorothea
describe her misadventures. When she had finished Don Fernando
recounted what had befallen him in the city after he had found in
Luscinda's bosom the paper in which she declared that she was
Cardenio's wife, and never could be his. He said he meant to kill her,
and would have done so had he not been prevented by her parents, and
that he quitted the house full of rage and shame, and resolved to
avenge himself when a more convenient opportunity should offer. The
next day he learned that Luscinda had disappeared from her father's
house, and that no one could tell whither she had gone. Finally, at
the end of some months he ascertained that she was in a convent and
meant to remain there all the rest of her life, if she were not to
share it with Cardenio; and as soon as he had learned this, taking
these three gentlemen as his companions, he arrived at the place where
she was, but avoided speaking to her, fearing that if it were known he
was there stricter precautions would be taken in the convent; and
watching a time when the porter's lodge was open he left two to guard
the gate, and he and the other entered the convent in quest of
Luscinda, whom they found in the cloisters in conversation with one of
the nuns, and carrying her off without giving her time to resist, they
reached a place with her where they provided themselves with what they
required for taking her away; all which they were able to do in
complete safety, as the convent was in the country at a considerable
distance from the city. He added that when Luscinda found herself in
his power she lost all consciousness, and after returning to herself
did nothing but weep and sigh without speaking a word; and thus in
silence and tears they reached that inn, which for him was reaching
heaven where all the mischances of earth are over and at an end.
CHAPTER XXXVII. IN WHICH IS CONTINUED THE STORY OF THE FAMOUS PRINCESS
MICOMICONA, WITH OTHER DROLL ADVENTURES To all this Sancho listened
with no little sorrow at heart to see how his hopes of dignity were
fading away and vanishing in smoke, and how the fair Princess
Micomicona had turned into Dorothea, and the giant into Don Fernando,
while his master was sleeping tranquilly, totally unconscious of all
that had come to pass. Dorothea was unable to persuade herself that
her present happiness was not all a dream; Cardenio was in a similar
state of mind, and Luscinda's thoughts ran in the same direction. Don
Fernando gave thanks to Heaven for the favour shown to him and for
having been rescued from the intricate labyrinth in which he had been
brought so near the destruction of his good name and of his soul; and
in short everybody in the inn was full of contentment and satisfaction
at the happy issue of such a complicated and hopeless business. The
curate as a sensible man made sound reflections upon the whole affair,
and congratulated each upon his good fortune; but the one that was in
the highest spirits and good humour was the landlady, because of the
promise Cardenio and the curate had given her to pay for all the
losses and damage she had sustained through Don Quixote's means.
Sancho, as has been already said, was the only one who was distressed,
unhappy, and dejected; and so with a long face he went in to his
master, who had just awoke, and said to him: "Sir Rueful Countenance,
your worship may as well sleep on as much as you like, without
troubling yourself about killing any giant or restoring her kingdom to
the princess; for that is all over and settled now." "I should think
it was," replied Don Quixote, "for I have had the most prodigious and
stupendous battle with the giant that I ever remember having had all
the days of my life; and with one back-stroke-swish!--I brought his
head tumbling to the ground, and so much blood gushed forth from him
that it ran in rivulets over the earth like water." "Like red wine,
your worship had better say," replied Sancho; "for I would have you
know, if you don't know it, that the dead giant is a hacked wine-skin,
and the blood four-and-twenty gallons of red wine that it had in its
belly, and the cut-off head is the bitch that bore me; and the devil
take it all." "What art thou talking about, fool?" said Don Quixote;
"art thou in thy senses?" "Let your worship get up," said Sancho, "and
you will see the nice business you have made of it, and what we have
to pay; and you will see the queen turned into a private lady called
Dorothea, and other things that will astonish you, if you understand
them." "I shall not be surprised at anything of the kind," returned
Don Quixote; "for if thou dost remember the last time we were here I
told thee that everything that happened here was a matter of
enchantment, and it would be no wonder if it were the same now." "I
could believe all that," replied Sancho, "if my blanketing was the
same sort of thing also; only it wasn't, but real and genuine; for I
saw the landlord, Who is here to-day, holding one end of the blanket
and jerking me up to the skies very neatly and smartly, and with as
much laughter as strength; and when it comes to be a case of knowing
people, I hold for my part, simple and sinner as I am, that there is
no enchantment about it at all, but a great deal of bruising and bad
luck." "Well, well, God will give a remedy," said Don Quixote; "hand
me my clothes and let me go out, for I want to see these
transformations and things thou speakest of." Sancho fetched him his
clothes; and while he was dressing, the curate gave Don Fernando and
the others present an account of Don Quixote's madness and of the
stratagem they had made use of to withdraw him from that Pena Pobre
where he fancied himself stationed because of his lady's scorn. He
described to them also nearly all the adventures that Sancho had
mentioned, at which they marvelled and laughed not a little, thinking
it, as all did, the strangest form of madness a crazy intellect could
be capable of. But now, the curate said, that the lady Dorothea's good
fortune prevented her from proceeding with their purpose, it would be
necessary to devise or discover some other way of getting him home.
Cardenio proposed to carry out the scheme they had begun, and
suggested that Luscinda would act and support Dorothea's part
sufficiently well. "No," said Don Fernando, "that must not be, for I
want Dorothea to follow out this idea of hers; and if the worthy
gentleman's village is not very far off, I shall be happy if I can do
anything for his relief." "It is not more than two days' journey from
this," said the curate. "Even if it were more," said Don Fernando, "I
would gladly travel so far for the sake of doing so good a work. "At
this moment Don Quixote came out in full panoply, with Mambrino's
helmet, all dinted as it was, on his head, his buckler on his arm, and
leaning on his staff or pike. The strange figure he presented filled
Don Fernando and the rest with amazement as they contemplated his lean
yellow face half a league long, his armour of all sorts, and the
solemnity of his deportment. They stood silent waiting to see what he
would say, and he, fixing his eyes on the air Dorothea, addressed her
with great gravity and composure: "I am informed, fair lady, by my
squire here that your greatness has been annihilated and your being
abolished, since, from a queen and lady of high degree as you used to
be, you have been turned into a private maiden. If this has been done
by the command of the magician king your father, through fear that I
should not afford you the aid you need and are entitled to, I may tell
you he did not know and does not know half the mass, and was little
versed in the annals of chivalry; for, if he had read and gone through
them as attentively and deliberately as I have, he would have found at
every turn that knights of less renown than mine have accomplished
things more difficult: it is no great matter to kill a whelp of a
giant, however arrogant he may be; for it is not many hours since I
myself was engaged with one, and-I will not speak of it, that they may
not say I am lying; time, however, that reveals all, will tell the
tale when we least expect it." "You were engaged with a couple of
wine-skins, and not a giant," said the landlord at this; but Don
Fernando told him to hold his tongue and on no account interrupt Don
Quixote, who continued, "I say in conclusion, high and disinherited
lady, that if your father has brought about this metamorphosis in your
person for the reason I have mentioned, you ought not to attach any
importance to it; for there is no peril on earth through which my
sword will not force a way, and with it, before many days are over, I
will bring your enemy's head to the ground and place on yours the
crown of your kingdom." Don Quixote said no more, and waited for the
reply of the princess, who aware of Don Fernando's determination to
carry on the deception until Don Quixote had been conveyed to his
home, with great ease of manner and gravity made answer, "Whoever told
you, valiant Knight of the Rueful Countenance, that I had undergone
any change or transformation did not tell you the truth, for I am the
same as I was yesterday. It is true that certain strokes of good
fortune, that have given me more than I could have hoped for, have
made some alteration in me; but I have not therefore ceased to be what
I was before, or to entertain the same desire I have had all through
of availing myself of the might of your valiant and invincible arm.
And so, senor, let your goodness reinstate the father that begot me in
your good opinion, and be assured that he was a wise and prudent man,
since by his craft he found out such a sure and easy way of remedying
my misfortune; for I believe, senor, that had it not been for you I
should never have lit upon the good fortune I now possess; and in this
I am saying what is perfectly true; as most of these gentlemen who are
present can fully testify. All that remains is to set out on our
journey to-morrow, for to-day we could not make much way; and for the
rest of the happy result I am looking forward to, I trust to God and
the valour of your heart." So said the sprightly Dorothea, and on
hearing her Don Quixote turned to Sancho, and said to him, with an
angry air, "I declare now, little Sancho, thou art the greatest little
villain in Spain. Say, thief and vagabond, hast thou not just now told
me that this princess had been turned into a maiden called Dorothea,
and that the head which I am persuaded I cut off from a giant was the
bitch that bore thee, and other nonsense that put me in the greatest
perplexity I have ever been in all my life? I vow" (and here he looked
to heaven and ground his teeth) "I have a mind to play the mischief
with thee, in a way that will teach sense for the future to all lying
squires of knights-errant in the world." "Let your worship be calm,
senor," returned Sancho, "for it may well be that I have been mistaken
as to the change of the lady princess Micomicona; but as to the
giant's head, or at least as to the piercing of the wine-skins, and
the blood being red wine, I make no mistake, as sure as there is a
God; because the wounded skins are there at the head of your worship's
bed, and the wine has made a lake of the room; if not you will see
when the eggs come to be fried; I mean when his worship the landlord
calls for all the damages: for the rest, I am heartily glad that her
ladyship the queen is as she was, for it concerns me as much as
anyone." "I tell thee again, Sancho, thou art a fool," said Don
Quixote; "forgive me, and that will do." "That will do," said Don
Fernando; "let us say no more about it; and as her ladyship the
princess proposes to set out to-morrow because it is too late to-day,
so be it, and we will pass the night in pleasant conversation, and
to-morrow we will all accompany Senor Don Quixote; for we wish to
witness the valiant and unparalleled achievements he is about to
perform in the course of this mighty enterprise which he has
undertaken." "It is I who shall wait upon and accompany you," said Don
Quixote; "and I am much gratified by the favour that is bestowed upon
me, and the good opinion entertained of me, which I shall strive to
justify or it shall cost me my life, or even more, if it can possibly
cost me more." Many were the compliments and expressions of politeness
that passed between Don Quixote and Don Fernando; but they were
brought to an end by a traveller who at this moment entered the inn,
and who seemed from his attire to be a Christian lately come from the
country of the Moors, for he was dressed in a short-skirted coat of
blue cloth with half-sleeves and without a collar; his breeches were
also of blue cloth, and his cap of the same colour, and he wore yellow
buskins and had a Moorish cutlass slung from a baldric across his
breast. Behind him, mounted upon an ass, there came a woman dressed in
Moorish fashion, with her face veiled and a scarf on her head, and
wearing a little brocaded cap, and a mantle that covered her from her
shoulders to her feet. The man was of a robust and well-proportioned
frame, in age a little over forty, rather swarthy in complexion, with
long moustaches and a full beard, and, in short, his appearance was
such that if he had been well dressed he would have been taken for a
person of quality and good birth. On entering he asked for a room, and
when they told him there was none in the inn he seemed distressed, and
approaching her who by her dress seemed to be a Moor he her down from
saddle in his arms. Luscinda, Dorothea, the landlady, her daughter and
Maritornes, attracted by the strange, and to them entirely new
costume, gathered round her; and Dorothea, who was always kindly,
courteous, and quick-witted, perceiving that both she and the man who
had brought her were annoyed at not finding a room, said to her, "Do
not be put out, senora, by the discomfort and want of luxuries here,
for it is the way of road-side inns to be without them; still, if you
will be pleased to share our lodging with us (pointing to Luscinda)
perhaps you will have found worse accommodation in the course of your
journey." To this the veiled lady made no reply; all she did was to
rise from her seat, crossing her hands upon her bosom, bowing her head
and bending her body as a sign that she returned thanks. From her
silence they concluded that she must be a Moor and unable to speak a
Christian tongue. At this moment the captive came up, having been
until now otherwise engaged, and seeing that they all stood round his
companion and that she made no reply to what they addressed to her, he
said, "Ladies, this damsel hardly understands my language and can
speak none but that of her own country, for which reason she does not
and cannot answer what has been asked of her." "Nothing has been asked
of her," returned Luscinda; "she has only been offered our company for
this evening and a share of the quarters we occupy, where she shall be
made as comfortable as the circumstances allow, with the good-will we
are bound to show all strangers that stand in need of it, especially
if it be a woman to whom the service is rendered." "On her part and my
own, senora," replied the captive, "I kiss your hands, and I esteem
highly, as I ought, the favour you have offered, which, on such an
occasion and coming from persons of your appearance, is, it is plain
to see, a very great one." "Tell me, senor," said Dorothea, "is this
lady a Christian or a Moor? for her dress and her silence lead us to
imagine that she is what we could wish she was not." "In dress and
outwardly," said he, "she is a Moor, but at heart she is a thoroughly
good Christian, for she has the greatest desire to become one." "Then
she has not been baptised?" returned Luscinda. "There has been no
opportunity for that," replied the captive, "since she left Algiers,
her native country and home; and up to the present she has not found
herself in any such imminent danger of death as to make it necessary
to baptise her before she has been instructed in all the ceremonies
our holy mother Church ordains; but, please God, ere long she shall be
baptised with the solemnity befitting her which is higher than her
dress or mine indicates." By these words he excited a desire in all
who heard him, to know who the Moorish lady and the captive were, but
no one liked to ask just then, seeing that it was a fitter moment for
helping them to rest themselves than for questioning them about their
lives. Dorothea took the Moorish lady by the hand and leading her to a
seat beside herself, requested her to remove her veil. She looked at
the captive as if to ask him what they meant and what she was to do.
He said to her in Arabic that they asked her to take off her veil, and
thereupon she removed it and disclosed a countenance so lovely, that
to Dorothea she seemed more beautiful than Luscinda, and to Luscinda
more beautiful than Dorothea, and all the bystanders felt that if any
beauty could compare with theirs it was the Moorish lady's, and there
were even those who were inclined to give it somewhat the preference.
And as it is the privilege and charm of beauty to win the heart and
secure good-will, all forthwith became eager to show kindness and
attention to the lovely Moor. Don Fernando asked the captive what her
name was, and he replied that it was Lela Zoraida; but the instant she
heard him, she guessed what the Christian had asked, and said hastily,
with some displeasure and energy, "No, not Zoraida; Maria, Maria!"
giving them to understand that she was called "Maria" and not
"Zoraida." These words, and the touching earnestness with which she
uttered them, drew more than one tear from some of the listeners,
particularly the women, who are by nature tender-hearted and
compassionate. Luscinda embraced her affectionately, saying, "Yes,
yes, Maria, Maria," to which the Moor replied, "Yes, yes, Maria;
Zoraida macange," which means "not Zoraida." Night was now
approaching, and by the orders of those who accompanied Don Fernando
the landlord had taken care and pains to prepare for them the best
supper that was in his power. The hour therefore having arrived they
all took their seats at a long table like a refectory one, for round
or square table there was none in the inn, and the seat of honour at
the head of it, though he was for refusing it, they assigned to Don
Quixote, who desired the lady Micomicona to place herself by his side,
as he was her protector. Luscinda and Zoraida took their places next
her, opposite to them were Don Fernando and Cardenio, and next the
captive and the other gentlemen, and by the side of the ladies, the
curate and the barber. And so they supped in high enjoyment, which was
increased when they observed Don Quixote leave off eating, and, moved
by an impulse like that which made him deliver himself at such length
when he supped with the goatherds, begin to address them: "Verily,
gentlemen, if we reflect upon it, great and marvellous are the things
they see, who make profession of the order of knight-errantry. Say,
what being is there in this world, who entering the gate of this
castle at this moment, and seeing us as we are here, would suppose or
imagine us to be what we are? Who would say that this lady who is
beside me was the great queen that we all know her to be, or that I am
that Knight of the Rueful Countenance, trumpeted far and wide by the
mouth of Fame? Now, there can be no doubt that this art and calling
surpasses all those that mankind has invented, and is the more
deserving of being held in honour in proportion as it is the more
exposed to peril. Away with those who assert that letters have the
preeminence over arms; I will tell them, whosoever they may be, that
they know not what they say. For the reason which such persons
commonly assign, and upon which they chiefly rest, is, that the
labours of the mind are greater than those of the body, and that arms
give employment to the body alone; as if the calling were a porter's
trade, for which nothing more is required than sturdy strength; or as
if, in what we who profess them call arms, there were not included
acts of vigour for the execution of which high intelligence is
requisite; or as if the soul of the warrior, when he has an army, or
the defence of a city under his care, did not exert itself as much by
mind as by body. Nay; see whether by bodily strength it be possible to
learn or divine the intentions of the enemy, his plans, stratagems, or
obstacles, or to ward off impending mischief; for all these are the
work of the mind, and in them the body has no share whatever. Since,
therefore, arms have need of the mind, as much as letters, let us see
now which of the two minds, that of the man of letters or that of the
warrior, has most to do; and this will be seen by the end and goal
that each seeks to attain; for that purpose is the more estimable
which has for its aim the nobler object. The end and goal of
letters--I am not speaking now of divine letters, the aim of which is
to raise and direct the soul to Heaven; for with an end so infinite no
other can be compared--I speak of human letters, the end of which is
to establish distributive justice, give to every man that which is
his, and see and take care that good laws are observed: an end
undoubtedly noble, lofty, and deserving of high praise, but not such
as should be given to that sought by arms, which have for their end
and object peace, the greatest boon that men can desire in this life.
The first good news the world and mankind received was that which the
angels announced on the night that was our day, when they sang in the
air, 'Glory to God in the highest, and peace on earth to men of
good-will;' and the salutation which the great Master of heaven and
earth taught his disciples and chosen followers when they entered any
house, was to say, 'Peace be on this house;' and many other times he
said to them, 'My peace I give unto you, my peace I leave you, peace
be with you;' a jewel and a precious gift given and left by such a
hand: a jewel without which there can be no happiness either on earth
or in heaven. This peace is the true end of war; and war is only
another name for arms. This, then, being admitted, that the end of war
is peace, and that so far it has the advantage of the end of letters,
let us turn to the bodily labours of the man of letters, and those of
him who follows the profession of arms, and see which are the
greater." Don Quixote delivered his discourse in such a manner and in
such correct language, that for the time being he made it impossible
for any of his hearers to consider him a madman; on the contrary, as
they were mostly gentlemen, to whom arms are an appurtenance by birth,
they listened to him with great pleasure as he continued: "Here, then,
I say is what the student has to undergo; first of all poverty: not
that all are poor, but to put the case as strongly as possible: and
when I have said that he endures poverty, I think nothing more need be
said about his hard fortune, for he who is poor has no share of the
good things of life. This poverty he suffers from in various ways,
hunger, or cold, or nakedness, or all together; but for all that it is
not so extreme but that he gets something to eat, though it may be at
somewhat unseasonable hours and from the leavings of the rich; for the
greatest misery of the student is what they themselves call 'going out
for soup,' and there is always some neighbour's brazier or hearth for
them, which, if it does not warm, at least tempers the cold to them,
and lastly, they sleep comfortably at night under a roof. I will not
go into other particulars, as for example want of shirts, and no
superabundance of shoes, thin and threadbare garments, and gorging
themselves to surfeit in their voracity when good luck has treated
them to a banquet of some sort. By this road that I have described,
rough and hard, stumbling here, falling there, getting up again to
fall again, they reach the rank they desire, and that once attained,
we have seen many who have passed these Syrtes and Scyllas and
Charybdises, as if borne flying on the wings of favouring fortune; we
have seen them, I say, ruling and governing the world from a chair,
their hunger turned into satiety, their cold into comfort, their
nakedness into fine raiment, their sleep on a mat into repose in
holland and damask, the justly earned reward of their virtue; but,
contrasted and compared with what the warrior undergoes, all they have
undergone falls far short of it, as I am now about to show." CHAPTER
XXXVIII. WHICH TREATS OF THE CURIOUS DISCOURSE DON QUIXOTE DELIVERED
ON ARMS AND LETTERS Continuing his discourse Don Quixote said: "As we
began in the student's case with poverty and its accompaniments, let
us see now if the soldier is richer, and we shall find that in poverty
itself there is no one poorer; for he is dependent on his miserable
pay, which comes late or never, or else on what he can plunder,
seriously imperilling his life and conscience; and sometimes his
nakedness will be so great that a slashed doublet serves him for
uniform and shirt, and in the depth of winter he has to defend himself
against the inclemency of the weather in the open field with nothing
better than the breath of his mouth, which I need not say, coming from
an empty place, must come out cold, contrary to the laws of nature. To
be sure he looks forward to the approach of night to make up for all
these discomforts on the bed that awaits him, which, unless by some
fault of his, never sins by being over narrow, for he can easily
measure out on the ground as he likes, and roll himself about in it to
his heart's content without any fear of the sheets slipping away from
him. Then, after all this, suppose the day and hour for taking his
degree in his calling to have come; suppose the day of battle to have
arrived, when they invest him with the doctor's cap made of lint, to
mend some bullet-hole, perhaps, that has gone through his temples, or
left him with a crippled arm or leg. Or if this does not happen, and
merciful Heaven watches over him and keeps him safe and sound, it may
be he will be in the same poverty he was in before, and he must go
through more engagements and more battles, and come victorious out of
all before he betters himself; but miracles of that sort are seldom
seen. For tell me, sirs, if you have ever reflected upon it, by how
much do those who have gained by war fall short of the number of those
who have perished in it? No doubt you will reply that there can be no
comparison, that the dead cannot be numbered, while the living who
have been rewarded may be summed up with three figures. All which is
the reverse in the case of men of letters; for by skirts, to say
nothing of sleeves, they all find means of support; so that though the
soldier has more to endure, his reward is much less. But against all
this it may be urged that it is easier to reward two thousand
soldiers, for the former may be remunerated by giving them places,
which must perforce be conferred upon men of their calling, while the
latter can only be recompensed out of the very property of the master
they serve; but this impossibility only strengthens my argument.
"Putting this, however, aside, for it is a puzzling question for which
it is difficult to find a solution, let us return to the superiority
of arms over letters, a matter still undecided, so many are the
arguments put forward on each side; for besides those I have
mentioned, letters say that without them arms cannot maintain
themselves, for war, too, has its laws and is governed by them, and
laws belong to the domain of letters and men of letters. To this arms
make answer that without them laws cannot be maintained, for by arms
states are defended, kingdoms preserved, cities protected, roads made
safe, seas cleared of pirates; and, in short, if it were not for them,
states, kingdoms, monarchies, cities, ways by sea and land would be
exposed to the violence and confusion which war brings with it, so
long as it lasts and is free to make use of its privileges and powers.
And then it is plain that whatever costs most is valued and deserves
to be valued most. To attain to eminence in letters costs a man time,
watching, hunger, nakedness, headaches, indigestions, and other things
of the sort, some of which I have already referred to. But for a man
to come in the ordinary course of things to be a good soldier costs
him all the student suffers, and in an incomparably higher degree, for
at every step he runs the risk of losing his life. For what dread of
want or poverty that can reach or harass the student can compare with
what the soldier feels, who finds himself beleaguered in some
stronghold mounting guard in some ravelin or cavalier, knows that the
enemy is pushing a mine towards the post where he is stationed, and
cannot under any circumstances retire or fly from the imminent danger
that threatens him? All he can do is to inform his captain of what is
going on so that he may try to remedy it by a counter-mine, and then
stand his ground in fear and expectation of the moment when he will
fly up to the clouds without wings and descend into the deep against
his will. And if this seems a trifling risk, let us see whether it is
equalled or surpassed by the encounter of two galleys stem to stem, in
the midst of the open sea, locked and entangled one with the other,
when the soldier has no more standing room than two feet of the plank
of the spur; and yet, though he sees before him threatening him as
many ministers of death as there are cannon of the foe pointed at him,
not a lance length from his body, and sees too that with the first
heedless step he will go down to visit the profundities of Neptune's
bosom, still with dauntless heart, urged on by honour that nerves him,
he makes himself a target for all that musketry, and struggles to
cross that narrow path to the enemy's ship. And what is still more
marvellous, no sooner has one gone down into the depths he will never
rise from till the end of the world, than another takes his place; and
if he too falls into the sea that waits for him like an enemy, another
and another will succeed him without a moment's pause between their
deaths: courage and daring the greatest that all the chances of war
can show. Happy the blest ages that knew not the dread fury of those
devilish engines of artillery, whose inventor I am persuaded is in
hell receiving the reward of his diabolical invention, by which he
made it easy for a base and cowardly arm to take the life of a gallant
gentleman; and that, when he knows not how or whence, in the height of
the ardour and enthusiasm that fire and animate brave hearts, there
should come some random bullet, discharged perhaps by one who fled in
terror at the flash when he fired off his accursed machine, which in
an instant puts an end to the projects and cuts off the life of one
who deserved to live for ages to come. And thus when I reflect on
this, I am almost tempted to say that in my heart I repent of having
adopted this profession of knight-errant in so detestable an age as we
live in now; for though no peril can make me fear, still it gives me
some uneasiness to think that powder and lead may rob me of the
opportunity of making myself famous and renowned throughout the known
earth by the might of my arm and the edge of my sword. But Heaven's
will be done; if I succeed in my attempt I shall be all the more
honoured, as I have faced greater dangers than the knights-errant of
yore exposed themselves to." All this lengthy discourse Don Quixote
delivered while the others supped, forgetting to raise a morsel to his
lips, though Sancho more than once told him to eat his supper, as he
would have time enough afterwards to say all he wanted. It excited
fresh pity in those who had heard him to see a man of apparently sound
sense, and with rational views on every subject he discussed, so
hopelessly wanting in all, when his wretched unlucky chivalry was in
question. The curate told him he was quite right in pursuing the
object he had in view, and that such a motive was natural and becoming
in cavaliers as distinguished as he seemed and his gallant bearing
showed him to be; and that he himself in his younger days had followed
the same honourable calling, roaming in quest of adventures in various
parts of the world, among others the Curing-grounds of Malaga, the
Isles of Riaran, the Precinct of Seville, the Little Market of
Segovia, the Olivera of Valencia, the Rondilla of Granada, the Strand
of San Lucar, the Colt of Cordova, the Taverns of Toledo, and divers
other quarters, where he had proved the nimbleness of his feet and the
lightness of his fingers, doing many wrongs, cheating many widows,
ruining maids and swindling minors, and, in short, bringing himself
under the notice of almost every tribunal and court of justice in
Spain; until at last he had retired to this castle of his, where he
was living upon his property and upon that of others; and where he
received all knights-errant of whatever rank or condition they might
be, all for the great love he bore them and that they might share
their substance with him in return for his benevolence. He told him,
moreover, that in this castle of his there was no chapel in which he
could watch his armour, as it had been pulled down in order to be
rebuilt, but that in a case of necessity it might, he knew, be watched
anywhere, and he might watch it that night in a courtyard of the
castle, and in the morning, God willing, the requisite ceremonies
might be performed so as to have him dubbed a knight, and so
thoroughly dubbed that nobody could be more so. He asked if he had any
money with him, to which Don Quixote replied that he had not a
farthing, as in the histories of knights-errant he had never read of
any of them carrying any. On this point the landlord told him he was
mistaken; for, though not recorded in the histories, because in the
author's opinion there was no need to mention anything so obvious and
necessary as money and clean shirts, it was not to be supposed
therefore that they did not carry them, and he might regard it as
certain and established that all knights-errant (about whom there were
so many full and unimpeachable books) carried well-furnished purses in
case of emergency, and likewise carried shirts and a little box of
ointment to cure the wounds they received. For in those plains and
deserts where they engaged in combat and came out wounded, it was not
always that there was some one to cure them, unless indeed they had
for a friend some sage magician to succour them at once by fetching
through the air upon a cloud some damsel or dwarf with a vial of water
of such virtue that by tasting one drop of it they were cured of their
hurts and wounds in an instant and left as sound as if they had not
received any damage whatever. But in case this should not occur, the
knights of old took care to see that their squires were provided with
money and other requisites, such as lint and ointments for healing
purposes; and when it happened that knights had no squires (which was
rarely and seldom the case) they themselves carried everything in
cunning saddle-bags that were hardly seen on the horse's croup, as if
it were something else of more importance, because, unless for some
such reason, carrying saddle-bags was not very favourably regarded
among knights-errant. He therefore advised him (and, as his godson so
soon to be, he might even command him) never from that time forth to
travel without money and the usual requirements, and he would find the
advantage of them when he least expected it. Don Quixote promised to
follow his advice scrupulously, and it was arranged forthwith that he
should watch his armour in a large yard at one side of the inn; so,
collecting it all together, Don Quixote placed it on a trough that
stood by the side of a well, and bracing his buckler on his arm he
grasped his lance and began with a stately air to march up and down in
front of the trough, and as he began his march night began to fall.
The landlord told all the people who were in the inn about the craze
of his guest, the watching of the armour, and the dubbing ceremony he
contemplated. Full of wonder at so strange a form of madness, they
flocked to see it from a distance, and observed with what composure he
sometimes paced up and down, or sometimes, leaning on his lance, gazed
on his armour without taking his eyes off it for ever so long; and as
the night closed in with a light from the moon so brilliant that it
might vie with his that lent it, everything the novice knight did was
plainly seen by all. Meanwhile one of the carriers who were in the inn
thought fit to water his team, and it was necessary to remove Don
Quixote's armour as it lay on the trough; but he seeing the other
approach hailed him in a loud voice, "O thou, whoever thou art, rash
knight that comest to lay hands on the armour of the most valorous
errant that ever girt on sword, have a care what thou dost; touch it
not unless thou wouldst lay down thy life as the penalty of thy
rashness." The carrier gave no heed to these words (and he would have
done better to heed them if he had been heedful of his health), but
seizing it by the straps flung the armour some distance from him.
Seeing this, Don Quixote raised his eyes to heaven, and fixing his
thoughts, apparently, upon his lady Dulcinea, exclaimed, "Aid me, lady
mine, in this the first encounter that presents itself to this breast
which thou holdest in subjection; let not thy favour and protection
fail me in this first jeopardy;" and, with these words and others to
the same purpose, dropping his buckler he lifted his lance with both
hands and with it smote such a blow on the carrier's head that he
stretched him on the ground, so stunned that had he followed it up
with a second there would have been no need of a surgeon to cure him.
This done, he picked up his armour and returned to his beat with the
same serenity as before. Shortly after this, another, not knowing what
had happened (for the carrier still lay senseless), came with the same
object of giving water to his mules, and was proceeding to remove the
armour in order to clear the trough, when Don Quixote, without
uttering a word or imploring aid from anyone, once more dropped his
buckler and once more lifted his lance, and without actually breaking
the second carrier's head into pieces, made more than three of it, for
he laid it open in four. At the noise all the people of the inn ran to
the spot, and among them the landlord. Seeing this, Don Quixote braced
his buckler on his arm, and with his hand on his sword exclaimed, "O
Lady of Beauty, strength and support of my faint heart, it is time for
thee to turn the eyes of thy greatness on this thy captive knight on
the brink of so mighty an adventure." By this he felt himself so
inspired that he would not have flinched if all the carriers in the
world had assailed him. The comrades of the wounded perceiving the
plight they were in began from a distance to shower stones on Don
Quixote, who screened himself as best he could with his buckler, not
daring to quit the trough and leave his armour unprotected. The
landlord shouted to them to leave him alone, for he had already told
them that he was mad, and as a madman he would not be accountable even
if he killed them all. Still louder shouted Don Quixote, calling them
knaves and traitors, and the lord of the castle, who allowed
knights-errant to be treated in this fashion, a villain and a low-born
knight whom, had he received the order of knighthood, he would call to
account for his treachery. "But of you," he cried, "base and vile
rabble, I make no account; fling, strike, come on, do all ye can
against me, ye shall see what the reward of your folly and insolence
will be." This he uttered with so much spirit and boldness that he
filled his assailants with a terrible fear, and as much for this
reason as at the persuasion of the landlord they left off stoning him,
and he allowed them to carry off the wounded, and with the same
calmness and composure as before resumed the watch over his armour.
But these freaks of his guest were not much to the liking of the
landlord, so he determined to cut matters short and confer upon him at
once the unlucky order of knighthood before any further misadventure
could occur; so, going up to him, he apologised for the rudeness
which, without his knowledge, had been offered to him by these low
people, who, however, had been well punished for their audacity. As he
had already told him, he said, there was no chapel in the castle, nor
was it needed for what remained to be done, for, as he understood the
ceremonial of the order, the whole point of being dubbed a knight lay
in the accolade and in the slap on the shoulder, and that could be
administered in the middle of a field; and that he had now done all
that was needful as to watching the armour, for all requirements were
satisfied by a watch of two hours only, while he had been more than
four about it. Don Quixote believed it all, and told him he stood
there ready to obey him, and to make an end of it with as much
despatch as possible; for, if he were again attacked, and felt himself
to be dubbed knight, he would not, he thought, leave a soul alive in
the castle, except such as out of respect he might spare at his
bidding. Thus warned and menaced, the castellan forthwith brought out
a book in which he used to enter the straw and barley he served out to
the carriers, and, with a lad carrying a candle-end, and the two
damsels already mentioned, he returned to where Don Quixote stood, and
bade him kneel down. Then, reading from his account-book as if he were
repeating some devout prayer, in the middle of his delivery he raised
his hand and gave him a sturdy blow on the neck, and then, with his
own sword, a smart slap on the shoulder, all the while muttering
between his teeth as if he was saying his prayers. Having done this,
he directed one of the ladies to gird on his sword, which she did with
great self-possession and gravity, and not a little was required to
prevent a burst of laughter at each stage of the ceremony; but what
they had already seen of the novice knight's prowess kept their
laughter within bounds. On girding him with the sword the worthy lady
said to him, "May God make your worship a very fortunate knight, and
grant you success in battle." Don Quixote asked her name in order that
he might from that time forward know to whom he was beholden for the
favour he had received, as he meant to confer upon her some portion of
the honour he acquired by the might of his arm. She answered with
great humility that she was called La Tolosa, and that she was the
daughter of a cobbler of Toledo who lived in the stalls of
Sanchobienaya, and that wherever she might be she would serve and
esteem him as her lord. Don Quixote said in reply that she would do
him a favour if thenceforward she assumed the "Don" and called herself
Dona Tolosa. She promised she would, and then the other buckled on his
spur, and with her followed almost the same conversation as with the
lady of the sword. He asked her name, and she said it was La Molinera,
and that she was the daughter of a cobbler of Toledo who lived in the
stalls of Sanchobienaya, and that wherever she might be she would
serve and esteem him as her lord. Don Quixote said in reply that she
would do him a favour if thenceforward she assumed the "Don" and
called herself Dona Tolosa. She promised she would, and then the other
buckled on his spur, and with her followed almost the same
conversation as with the lady of the sword. He asked her name, and she
said it was La Molinera, and that she was the daughter of a cobbler of
Toledo who lived in the stalls of Sanchobienaya, and that wherever she
might be she would serve and esteem him as her lord. Don Quixote said
in reply that she would do him a favour if thenceforward she assumed
the "Don" and called herself Dona Tolosa. She promised she would, and
then the other buckled on his spur, and with her followed almost the
same conversation as with the lady of the sword. He asked her name,
and she said it was La Molinera, and that she was the daughter of a
cobbler of Toledo who lived in the stalls of Sanchobienaya, and that
wherever she might be she would serve and esteem him as her lord. Don
Quixote said in reply that she would do him a favour if thenceforward
she assumed the "Don" and called herself Dona Tolosa. She promised she
would, and then the other buckled on his spur, and with her followed
almost the same conversation as with the lady of the sword. He asked
her name, and she said it was La Molinera, and that she was the
daughter of a respectable miller of Antequera; and of her likewise Don
Quixote requested that she would adopt the "Don" and call herself Dona
Molinera, making offers to her further services and favours. Having
thus, with hot haste and speed, brought to a conclusion these
never-till-now-seen ceremonies, Don Quixote was on thorns until he saw
himself on horseback sallying forth in quest of adventures; and
saddling Rocinante at once he mounted, and embracing his host, as he
returned thanks for his kindness in knighting him, he addressed him in
language so extraordinary that it is impossible to convey an idea of
it or report it. The landlord, to get him out of the inn, replied with
no less rhetoric though with shorter words, and without calling upon
him to pay the reckoning let him go with a Godspeed. CHAPTER IV. OF
WHAT HAPPENED TO OUR KNIGHT WHEN HE LEFT THE INN Day was dawning when
Don Quixote quitted the inn, so happy, so gay, so exhilarated at
finding himself now dubbed a knight, that his joy was like to burst
his horse-girths. However, recalling the advice of his host as to the
requisites he ought to carry with him, especially that referring to
money and shirts, he determined to go home and provide himself with
all, and also with a squire, for he reckoned upon securing a
farm-labourer, a neighbour of his, a poor man with a family, but very
well qualified for the office of squire to a knight. With this object
he turned his horse's head towards his village, and Rocinante, thus
reminded of his old quarters, stepped out so briskly that he hardly
seemed to tread the earth. He had not gone far, when out of a thicket
on his right there seemed to come feeble cries as of some one in
distress, and the instant he heard them he exclaimed, "Thanks be to
heaven for the favour it accords me, that it so soon offers me an
opportunity of fulfilling the obligation I have undertaken, and
gathering the fruit of my ambition. These cries, no doubt, come from
some man or woman in want of help, and needing my aid and protection;"
and wheeling, he turned Rocinante in the direction whence the cries
seemed to proceed. He had gone but a few paces into the wood, when he
saw a mare tied to an oak, and tied to another, and stripped from the
waist upwards, a youth of about fifteen years of age had come to that
inn, one dressed like a muleteer, and of such and such an appearance,
describing that of Dona Clara's lover. The landlord replied that there
were so many people in the inn he had not noticed the person they were
inquiring for; but one of them observing the coach in which the Judge
had come, said, "He is here no doubt, for this is the coach he is
following: let one of us stay at the gate, and the rest go in to look
for him; or indeed it would be as well if one of us went round the
inn, lest he should escape over the wall of the yard." "So be it,"
said another; and while two of them went in, one remained at the gate
and the other made the circuit of the inn; observing all which, the
landlord was unable to conjecture for what reason they were taking all
these precautions, though he understood they were looking for the
youth whose description they had given him. It was by this time broad
daylight; and for that reason, as well as in consequence of the noise
Don Quixote had made, everybody was awake and up, but particularly
Dona Clara and Dorothea; for they had been able to sleep but badly
that night, the one from agitation at having her lover so near her,
the other from curiosity to see him. Don Quixote, when he saw that not
one of the four travellers took any notice of him or replied to his
challenge, was furious and ready to die with indignation and wrath;
and if he could have found in the ordinances of chivalry that it was
lawful for a knight-errant to undertake or engage in another
enterprise, when he had plighted his word and faith not to involve
himself in any until he had made an end of the one to which he was
pledged, he would have attacked the whole of them, and would have made
them return an answer in spite of themselves. But considering that it
would not become him, nor be right, to begin any new emprise until he
had established Micomicona in her kingdom, he was constrained to hold
his peace and wait quietly to see what would be the upshot of the
proceedings of those same travellers; one of whom found the youth they
were seeking lying asleep by the side of a muleteer, without a thought
of anyone coming in search of him, much less finding him. The man laid
hold of him by the arm, saying, "It becomes you well indeed, Senor Don
Luis, to be in the dress you wear, and well the bed in which I find
you agrees with the luxury in which your mother reared you." The youth
rubbed his sleepy eyes and stared for a while at him who held him, but
presently recognised him as one of his father's servants, at which he
was so taken aback that for some time he could not find or utter a
word; while the servant went on to say, "There is nothing for it now,
Senor Don Luis, but to submit quietly and return home, unless it is
your wish that my lord, your father, should take his departure for the
other world, for nothing else can be the consequence of the grief he
is in at your absence." "But how did my father know that I had gone
this road and in this dress?" said Don Luis. "It was a student to whom
you confided your intentions," answered the servant, "that disclosed
them, touched with pity at the distress he saw your father suffer on
missing you; he therefore despatched four of his servants in quest of
you, and here we all are at your service, better pleased than you can
imagine that we shall return so soon and be able to restore you to
those eyes that so yearn for you." "That shall be as I please, or as
heaven orders," returned Don Luis. "What can you please or heaven
order," said the other, "except to agree to go back? Anything else is
impossible." All this conversation between the two was overheard by
the muleteer at whose side Don Luis lay, and rising, he went to report
what had taken place to Don Fernando, Cardenio, and the others, who
had by this time dressed themselves; and told them how the man had
addressed the youth as "Don," and what words had passed, and how he
wanted him to return to his father, which the youth was unwilling to
do. With this, and what they already knew of the rare voice that
heaven had bestowed upon him, they all felt very anxious to know more
particularly who he was, and even to help him if it was attempted to
employ force against him; so they hastened to where he was still
talking and arguing with his servant. Dorothea at this instant came
out of her room, followed by Dona Clara all in a tremor; and calling
Cardenio aside, she told him in a few words the story of the musician
and Dona Clara, and he at the same time told her what had happened,
how his father's servants had come in search of him; but in telling
her so, he did not speak low enough but that Dona Clara heard what he
said, at which she was so much agitated that had not Dorothea hastened
to support her she would have fallen to the ground. Cardenio then bade
Dorothea return to her room, as he would endeavour to make the whole
matter right, and they did as he desired. All the four who had come in
quest of Don Luis had now come into the inn and surrounded him, urging
him to return and console his father at once and without a moment's
delay. He replied that he could not do so on any account until he had
concluded some business in which his life, honour, and heart were at
stake. The servants pressed him, saying that most certainly they would
not return without him, and that they would take him away whether he
liked it or not. "You shall not do that," replied Don Luis, "unless
you take me dead; though however you take me, it will be without
life." By this time most of those in the inn had been attracted by the
dispute, but particularly Cardenio, Don Fernando, his companions, the
Judge, the curate, the barber, and Don Quixote; for he now considered
there was no necessity for mounting guard over the castle any longer.
Cardenio being already acquainted with the young man's story, asked
the men who wanted to take him away, what object they had in seeking
to carry off this youth against his will. "Our object," said one of
the four, "is to save the life of his father, who is in danger of
losing it through this gentleman's disappearance." Upon this Don Luis
exclaimed, "There is no need to make my affairs public here; I am
free, and I will return if I please; and if not, none of you shall
compel me." "Reason will compel your worship," said the man, "and if
it has no power over you, it has power over us, to make us do what we
came for, and what it is our duty to do." "Let us hear what the whole
affair is about," said the Judge at this; but the man, who knew him as
a neighbour of theirs, replied, "Do you not know this gentleman, Senor
Judge? He is the son of your neighbour, who has run away from his
father's house in a dress so unbecoming his rank, as your worship may
perceive." The judge on this looked at him more carefully and
recognised him, and embracing him said, "What folly is this, Senor Don
Luis, or what can have been the cause that could have induced you to
come here in this way, and in this dress, which so ill becomes your
condition?" Tears came into the eyes of the young man, and he was
unable to utter a word in reply to the Judge, who told the four
servants not to be uneasy, for all would be satisfactorily settled;
and then taking Don Luis by the hand, he drew him aside and asked the
reason of his having come there. But while he was questioning him they
heard a loud outcry at the gate of the inn, the cause of which was
that two of the guests who had passed the night there, seeing
everybody busy about finding out what it was the four men wanted, had
conceived the idea of going off without paying what they owed; but the
landlord, who minded his own affairs more than other people's, caught
them going out of the gate and demanded his reckoning, abusing them
for their dishonesty with such language that he drove them to reply
with their fists, and so they began to lay on him in such a style that
the poor man was forced to cry out, and call for help. The landlady
and her daughter could see no one more free to give aid than Don
Quixote, and to him the daughter said, "Sir knight, by the virtue God
has given you, help my poor father, for two wicked men are beating him
to a mummy." To which Don Quixote very deliberately and phlegmatically
replied, "Fair damsel, at the present moment your request is
inopportune, for I am debarred from involving myself in any adventure
until I have brought to a happy conclusion one to which my word has
pledged me; but that which I can do for you is what I will now
mention: run and tell your father to stand his ground as well as he
can in this battle, and on no account to allow himself to be
vanquished, while I go and request permission of the Princess
Micomicona to enable me to succour him in his distress; and if she
grants it, rest assured I will relieve him from it." "Sinner that I
am," exclaimed Maritornes, who stood by; "before you have got your
permission my master will be in the other world." "Give me leave,
senora, to obtain the permission I speak of," returned Don Quixote;
"and if I get it, it will matter very little if he is in the other
world; for I will rescue him thence in spite of all the same world can
do; or at any rate I will give you such a revenge over those who shall
have sent him there that you will be more than moderately satisfied;"
and without saying anything more he went and knelt before Dorothea,
requesting her Highness in knightly and errant phrase to be pleased to
grant him permission to aid and succour the castellan of that castle,
who now stood in grievous jeopardy. The princess granted it
graciously, and he at once, bracing his buckler on his arm and drawing
his sword, hastened to the inn-gate, where the two guests were still
handling the landlord roughly; but as soon as he reached the spot he
stopped short and stood still, though Maritornes and the landlady
asked him why he hesitated to help their master and husband. "I
hesitate," said Don Quixote, "because it is not lawful for me to draw
sword against persons of squirely condition; but call my squire Sancho
to me; for this defence and vengeance are his affair and business."
Thus matters stood at the inn-gate, where there was a very lively
exchange of fisticuffs and punches, to the sore damage of the landlord
and to the wrath of Maritornes, the landlady, and her daughter, who
were furious when they saw the pusillanimity of Don Quixote, and the
hard treatment their master, husband and father was undergoing. But
let us leave him there; for he will surely find some one to help him,
and if not, let him suffer and hold his tongue who attempts more than
his strength allows him to do; and let us go back fifty paces to see
what Don Luis said in reply to the Judge whom we left questioning him
privately as to his reasons for coming on foot and so meanly dressed.
To which the youth, pressing his hand in a way that showed his heart
was troubled by some great sorrow, and shedding a flood of tears, made
answer: "Senor, I have no more to tell you than that from the moment
when, through heaven's will and our being near neighbours, I first saw
Dona Clara, your daughter and my lady, from that instant I made her
the mistress of my will, and if yours, my true lord and father, offers
no impediment, this very day she shall become my wife. For her I left
my father's house, and for her I assumed this disguise, to follow her
whithersoever she may go, as the arrow seeks its mark or the sailor
the pole-star. She knows nothing more of my passion than what she may
have learned from having sometimes seen from a distance that my eyes
were filled with tears. You know already, senor, the wealth and noble
birth of my parents, and that I am their sole heir; if this be a
sufficient inducement for you to venture to make me completely happy,
accept me at once as your son; for if my father, influenced by other
objects of his own, should disapprove of this happiness I have sought
for myself, time has more power to alter and change things, than human
will." With this the love-smitten youth was silent, while the Judge,
after hearing him, was astonished, perplexed, and surprised, as well
at the manner and intelligence with which Don Luis had confessed the
secret of his heart, as at the position in which he found himself, not
knowing what course to take in a matter so sudden and unexpected. All
the answer, therefore, he gave him was to bid him to make his mind
easy for the present, and arrange with his servants not to take him
back that day, so that there might be time to consider what was best
for all parties. Don Luis kissed his hands by force, nay, bathed them
with his tears, in a way that would have touched a heart of marble,
not to say that of the Judge, who, as a shrewd man, had already
perceived how advantageous the marriage would be to his daughter;
though, were it possible, he would have preferred that it should be
brought about with the consent of the father of Don Luis, who he knew
looked for a title for his son. The guests had by this time made peace
with the landlord, for, by persuasion and Don Quixote's fair words
more than by threats, they had paid him what he demanded, and the
servants of Don Luis were waiting for the end of the conversation with
the Judge and their master's decision, when the devil, who never
sleeps, contrived that the barber, from whom Don Quixote had taken
Mambrino's helmet, and Sancho Panza the trappings of his ass in
exchange for those of his own, should at this instant enter the inn;
which said barber, as he led his ass to the stable, observed Sancho
Panza engaged in repairing something or other belonging to the
pack-saddle; and the moment he saw it he knew it, and made bold to
attack Sancho, exclaiming, "Ho, sir thief, I have caught you! hand
over my basin and my pack-saddle, and all my trappings that you robbed
me of." Sancho, finding himself so unexpectedly assailed, and hearing
the abuse poured upon him, seized the pack-saddle with one hand, and
with the other gave the barber a cuff that bathed his teeth in blood;
the Judge took his part; Don Fernando had got one of the officers down
and was belabouring him heartily; the landlord raised his voice again
calling for help for the Holy Brotherhood; so that the whole inn was
nothing but cries, shouts, shrieks, confusion, terror, dismay,
mishaps, sword-cuts, fisticuffs, cudgellings, kicks, and bloodshed;
and in the midst of all this chaos, complication, and general
entanglement, Don Quixote took it into his head that he had been
plunged into the thick of the discord of Agramante's camp; and, in a
voice that shook the inn like thunder, he cried out: "Hold all, let
all sheathe their swords, let all be calm and attend to me as they
value their lives!" All paused at his mighty voice, and he went on to
say, "Did I not tell you, sirs, that this castle was enchanted, and
that a legion or so of devils dwelt in it? In proof whereof I call
upon you to behold with your own eyes how the discord of Agramante's
camp has come hither, and been transferred into the midst of us. See
how they fight, there for the sword, here for the horse, on that side
for the eagle, on this for the helmet; we are all fighting, and all at
cross purposes. Come then, you, Senor Judge, and you, senor curate;
let the one represent King Agramante and the other King Sobrino, and
make peace among us; for by God Almighty it is a sorry business that
so many persons of quality as we are should slay one another for such
trifling cause." The officers, who did not understand Don Quixote's
mode of speaking, and found themselves roughly handled by Don
Fernando, Cardenio, and their companions, were not to be appeased; the
barber was, however, for both his beard and his pack-saddle were the
worse for the struggle; Sancho like a good servant obeyed the
slightest word of his master; while the four servants of Don Luis kept
quiet when they saw how little they gained by not being so. The
landlord alone insisted upon it that they must punish the insolence of
this madman, who at every turn raised a disturbance in the inn; but at
length the uproar was stilled for the present; the pack-saddle
remained a caparison till the day of judgment, and the basin a helmet
and the inn a castle in Don Quixote's imagination. All having been now
pacified and made friends by the persuasion of the Judge and the
curate, the servants of Don Luis began again to urge him to return
with them at once; and while he was discussing the matter with them,
the Judge took counsel with Don Fernando, Cardenio, and the curate as
to what he ought to do in the case, telling them how it stood, and
what Don Luis had said to him. It was agreed at length that Don
Fernando should tell the servants of Don Luis who he was, and that it
was his desire that Don Luis should accompany him to Andalusia, where
he would receive from the marquis his brother the welcome his quality
entitled him to; for, otherwise, it was easy to see from the
determination of Don Luis that he would not return to his father at
present, though they tore him to pieces. On learning the rank of Don
Fernando and the resolution of Don Luis the four then settled it
between themselves that three of them should return to tell his father
how matters stood, and that the other should remain to wait upon Don
Luis, and not leave him until they came back for him, or his father's
orders were known. Thus by the authority of Agramante and the wisdom
of King Sobrino all this complication of disputes was arranged; but
the enemy of concord and hater of peace, feeling himself slighted and
made a fool of, and seeing how little he had gained after having
involved them all in such an elaborate entanglement, resolved to try
his hand once more by stirring up fresh quarrels and disturbances. It
came about in this wise: the officers were pacified on learning the
rank of those with whom they had been engaged, and withdrew from the
contest, considering that whatever the result might be they were
likely to get the worst of the battle; but one of them, the one who
had been thrashed and kicked by Don Fernando, recollected that among
some warrants he carried for the arrest of certain delinquents, he had
one against Don Quixote, whom the Holy Brotherhood had ordered to be
arrested for setting the galley slaves free, as Sancho had, with very
good reason, apprehended. Suspecting how it was, then, he wished to
satisfy himself as to whether Don Quixote's features corresponded; and
taking a parchment out of his bosom he lit upon what he was in search
of, and setting himself to read it deliberately, for he was not a
quick reader, as he made out each word he fixed his eyes on Don
Quixote, and went on comparing the description in the warrant with his
face, and discovered that beyond all doubt he was the person described
in it. As soon as he had satisfied himself, folding up the parchment,
he took the warrant in his left hand and with his right seized Don
Quixote by the collar so tightly that he did not allow him to breathe,
and shouted aloud, "Help for the Holy Brotherhood! and that you may
see I demand it in earnest, read this warrant which says this
highwayman is to be arrested." The curate took the warrant and saw
that what the officer said was true, and that it agreed with Don
Quixote's appearance, who, on his part, when he found himself roughly
handled by this rascally clown, worked up to the highest pitch of
wrath, and all his joints cracking with rage, with both hands seized
the officer by the throat with all his might, so that had he not been
helped by his comrades he would have yielded up his life ere Don
Quixote released his hold. The landlord, who had perforce to support
his brother officers, ran at once to aid them. The landlady, when she
saw her husband engaged in a fresh quarrel, lifted up her voice
afresh, and its note was immediately caught up by Maritornes and her
daughter, calling upon heaven and all present for help; and Sancho,
seeing what was going on, exclaimed, "By the Lord, it is quite true
what my master says about the enchantments of this castle, for it is
impossible to live an hour in peace in it!" Don Fernando parted the
officer and Don Quixote, and to their mutual contentment made them
relax the grip by which they held, the one the coat collar, the other
the throat of his adversary; for all this, however, the officers did
not cease to demand their prisoner and call on them to help, and
deliver him over bound into their power, as was required for the
service of the King and of the Holy Brotherhood, on whose behalf they
again demanded aid and assistance to effect the capture of this robber
and footpad of the highways. Don Quixote smiled when he heard these
words, and said very calmly, "Come now, base, ill-born brood; call ye
it highway robbery to give freedom to those in bondage, to release the
captives, to succour the miserable, to raise up the fallen, to relieve
the needy? Infamous beings, who by your vile grovelling intellects
deserve that heaven should not make known to you the virtue that lies
in knight-errantry, or show you the sin and ignorance in which ye lie
when ye refuse to respect the shadow, not to say the presence, of any
knight-errant! Come now; band, not of officers, but of thieves;
footpads with the licence of the Holy Brotherhood; tell me who was the
ignoramus who signed a warrant of arrest against such a knight as I
am? Who was he that did not know that knights-errant are independent
of all jurisdictions, that their law is their sword, their charter
their prowess, and their edicts their will? Who, I say again, was the
fool that knows not that there are no letters patent of nobility that
confer such privileges or exemptions as a knight-errant acquires the
day he is dubbed a knight, and devotes himself to the arduous calling
of chivalry? What knight-errant ever paid poll-tax, duty, queen's
pin-money, king's dues, toll or ferry? What tailor ever took payment
of him for making his clothes? What castellan that received him in his
castle ever made him pay his shot? What king did not seat him at his
table? What damsel was not enamoured of him and did not yield herself
up wholly to his will and pleasure? And, lastly, what knight-errant
has there been, is there, or will there ever be in the world, not bold
enough to give, single-handed, four hundred cudgellings to four
hundred officers of the Holy Brotherhood if they come in his way?"
CHAPTER XLVI. OF THE END OF THE NOTABLE ADVENTURE OF THE OFFICERS OF
THE HOLY BROTHERHOOD; AND OF THE GREAT FEROCITY OF OUR WORTHY KNIGHT,
DON QUIXOTE While Don Quixote was talking in this strain, the curate
was endeavouring to persuade the officers that he was out of his
senses, as they might perceive by his deeds and his words, and that
they need not press the matter any further, for even if they arrested
him and carried him off, they would have to release him by-and-by as a
madman; to which the holder of the warrant replied that he had nothing
to do with inquiring into Don Quixote's madness, but only to execute
his superior's orders, and that once taken they might let him go three
hundred times if they liked. "For all that," said the curate, "you
must not take him away this time, nor will he, it is my opinion, let
himself be taken away." In short, the curate used such arguments, and
Don Quixote did such mad things, that the officers would have been
more mad than he was if they had not perceived his want of wits, and
so they thought it best to allow themselves to be pacified, and even
to act as peacemakers between the barber and Sancho Panza, who still
continued their altercation with much bitterness. In the end they, as
officers of justice, settled the question by arbitration in such a
manner that both sides were, if not perfectly contented, at least to
some extent satisfied; for they changed the pack-saddles, but not the
girths or head-stalls; and as to Mambrino's helmet, the curate, under
the rose and without Don Quixote's knowing it, paid eight reals for
the basin, and the barber executed a full receipt and engagement to
make no further demand then or thenceforth for evermore, amen. These
two disputes, which were the most important and gravest, being
settled, it only remained for the servants of Don Luis to consent that
three of them should return while one was left to accompany him
whither Don Fernando desired to take him; and good luck and better
fortune, having already begun to solve difficulties and remove
obstructions in favour of the lovers and warriors of the inn, were
pleased to persevere and bring everything to a happy issue; for the
servants agreed to do as Don Luis wished; which gave Dona Clara such
happiness that no one could have looked into her face just then
without seeing the joy of her heart. Zoraida, though she did not fully
comprehend all she saw, was grave or gay without knowing why, as she
watched and studied the various countenances, but particularly her
Spaniard's, whom she followed with her eyes and clung to with her
soul. The gift and compensation which the curate gave the barber had
not escaped the landlord's notice, and he demanded Don Quixote's
reckoning, together with the amount of the damage to his wine-skins,
and the loss of his wine, swearing that neither Rocinante nor Sancho's
ass should leave the inn until he had been paid to the very last
farthing. The curate settled all amicably, and Don Fernando paid;
though the Judge had also very readily offered to pay the score; and
all became so peaceful and quiet that the inn no longer reminded one
of the discord of Agramante's camp, as Don Quixote said, but of the
peace and tranquillity of the days of Octavianus: for all which it was
the universal opinion that their thanks were due to the great zeal and
eloquence of the curate, and to the unexampled generosity of Don
Fernando. Finding himself now clear and quit of all quarrels, his
squire's as well as his own, Don Quixote considered that it would be
advisable to continue the journey he had begun, and bring to a close
that great adventure for which he had been called and chosen; and with
this high resolve he went and knelt before Dorothea, who, however,
would not allow him to utter a word until he had risen; so to obey her
he rose, and said, "It is a common proverb, fair lady, that 'diligence
is the mother of good fortune,' and experience has often shown in
important affairs that the earnestness of the negotiator brings the
doubtful case to a successful termination; but in nothing does this
truth show itself more plainly than in war, where quickness and
activity forestall the devices of the enemy, and win the victory
before the foe has time to defend himself. All this I say, exalted and
esteemed lady, because it seems to me that for us to remain any longer
in this castle now is useless, and may be injurious to us in a way
that we shall find out some day; for who knows but that your enemy the
giant may have learned by means of secret and diligent spies that I am
going to destroy him, and if the opportunity be given him he may seize
it to fortify himself in some impregnable castle or stronghold,
against which all my efforts and the might of my indefatigable arm may
avail but little? Therefore, lady, let us, as I say, forestall his
schemes by our activity, and let us depart at once in quest of fair
fortune; for your highness is only kept from enjoying it as fully as
you could desire by my delay in encountering your adversary." Don
Quixote held his peace and said no more, calmly awaiting the reply of
the beauteous princess, who, with commanding dignity and in a style
adapted to Don Quixote's own, replied to him in these words, "I give
you thanks, sir knight, for the eagerness you, like a good knight to
whom it is a natural obligation to succour the orphan and the needy,
display to afford me aid in my sore trouble; and heaven grant that
your wishes and mine may be realised, so that you may see that there
are women in this world capable of gratitude; as to my departure, let
it be forthwith, for I have no will but yours; dispose of me entirely
in accordance with your good pleasure; for she who has once entrusted
to you the defence of her person, and placed in your hands the
recovery of her dominions, must not think of offering opposition to
that which your wisdom may ordain." "On, then, in God's name," said
Don Quixote; "for, when a lady humbles herself to me, I will not lose
the opportunity of raising her up and placing her on the throne of her
ancestors. Let us depart at once, for the common saying that in delay
there is danger, lends spurs to my eagerness to take the road; and as
neither heaven has created nor hell seen any that can daunt or
intimidate me, saddle Rocinante, Sancho, and get ready thy ass and the
queen's palfrey, and let us take leave of the castellan and these
gentlemen, and go hence this very instant." Sancho, who was standing
by all the time, said, shaking his head, "Ah! master, master, there is
more mischief in the village than one hears of, begging all good
bodies' pardon." "What mischief can there be in any village, or in all
the cities of the world, you booby, that can hurt my reputation?" said
Don Quixote. "If your worship is angry," replied Sancho, "I will hold
my tongue and leave unsaid what as a good squire I am bound to say,
and what a good servant should tell his master." "Say what thou wilt,"
returned Don Quixote, "provided thy words be not meant to work upon my
fears; for thou, if thou fearest, art behaving like thyself; but I
like myself, in not fearing." "It is nothing of the sort, as I am a
sinner before God," said Sancho, "but that I take it to be sure and
certain that this lady, who calls herself queen of the great kingdom
of Micomicon, is no more so than my mother; for, if she was what she
says, she would not go rubbing noses with one that is here every
instant and behind every door." Dorothea turned red at Sancho's words,
for the truth was that her husband Don Fernando had now and then, when
the others were not looking, gathered from her lips some of the reward
his love had earned, and Sancho seeing this had considered that such
freedom was more like a courtesan than a queen of a great kingdom;
she, however, being unable or not caring to answer him, allowed him to
proceed, and he continued, "This I say, senor, because, if after we
have travelled roads and highways, and passed bad nights and worse
days, one who is now enjoying himself in this inn is to reap the fruit
of our labours, there is no need for me to be in a hurry to saddle
Rocinante, put the pad on the ass, or get ready the palfrey; for it
will be better for us to stay quiet, and let every jade mind her
spinning, and let us go to dinner." Good God, what was the indignation
of Don Quixote when he heard the audacious words of his squire! So
great was it, that in a voice inarticulate with rage, with a
stammering tongue, and eyes that flashed living fire, he exclaimed,
"Rascally clown, boorish, insolent, and ignorant, ill-spoken,
foul-mouthed, impudent backbiter and slanderer! Hast thou dared to
utter such words in my presence and in that of these illustrious
ladies? Hast thou dared to harbour such gross and shameless thoughts
in thy muddled imagination? Begone from my presence, thou born
monster, storehouse of lies, hoard of untruths, garner of knaveries,
inventor of scandals, publisher of absurdities, enemy of the respect
due to royal personages! Begone, show thyself no more before me under
pain of my wrath;" and so saying he knitted his brows, puffed out his
cheeks, gazed around him, and stamped on the ground violently with his
right foot, showing in every way the rage that was pent up in his
heart; and at his words and furious gestures Sancho was so scared and
terrified that he would have been glad if the earth had opened that
instant and swallowed him, and his only thought was to turn round and
make his escape from the angry presence of his master. But the
ready-witted Dorothea, who by this time so well understood Don
Quixote's humour, said, to mollify his wrath, "Be not irritated at the
absurdities your good squire has uttered, Sir Knight of the Rueful
Countenance, for perhaps he did not utter them without cause, and from
his good sense and Christian conscience it is not likely that he would
bear false witness against anyone. We may therefore believe, without
any hesitation, that since, as you say, sir knight, everything in this
castle goes and is brought about by means of enchantment, Sancho, I
say, may possibly have seen, through this diabolical medium, what he
says he saw so much to the detriment of my modesty." "I swear by God
Omnipotent," exclaimed Don Quixote at this, "your highness has hit the
point; and that some vile illusion must have come before this sinner
of a Sancho, that made him see what it would have been impossible to
see by any other means than enchantments; for I know well enough, from
the poor fellow's goodness and harmlessness, that he is incapable of
bearing false witness against anybody." "True, no doubt," said Don
Fernando, "for which reason, Senor Don Quixote, you ought to forgive
him and restore him to the bosom of your favour, sicut erat in
principio, before illusions of this sort had taken away his senses."
Don Quixote said he was ready to pardon him, and the curate went for
Sancho, who came in very humbly, and falling on his knees begged for
the hand of his master, who having presented it to him and allowed him
to kiss it, gave him his blessing and said, "Now, Sancho my son, thou
wilt be convinced of the truth of what I have many a time told thee,
that everything in this castle is done by means of enchantment." "So
it is, I believe," said Sancho, "except the affair of the blanket,
which came to pass in reality by ordinary means." "Believe it not,"
said Don Quixote, "for had it been so, I would have avenged thee that
instant, or even now; but neither then nor now could I, nor have I
seen anyone upon whom to avenge thy wrong." They were all eager to
know what the affair of the blanket was, and the landlord gave them a
minute account of Sancho's flights, at which they laughed not a
little, and at which Sancho would have been no less out of countenance
had not his master once more assured him it was all enchantment. For
all that his simplicity never reached so high a pitch that he could
persuade himself it was not the plain and simple truth, without any
deception whatever about it, that he had been blanketed by beings of
flesh and blood, and not by visionary and imaginary phantoms, as his
master believed and protested. The illustrious company had now been
two days in the inn; and as it seemed to them time to depart, they
devised a plan so that, without giving Dorothea and Don Fernando the
trouble of going back with Don Quixote to his village under pretence
of restoring Queen Micomicona, the curate and the barber might carry
him away with them as they proposed, and the curate be able to take
his madness in hand at home; and in pursuance of their plan they
arranged with the owner of an oxcart who happened to be passing that
way to carry him after this fashion. They constructed a kind of cage
with wooden bars, large enough to hold Don Quixote comfortably; and
then Don Fernando and his companions, the servants of Don Luis, and
the officers of the Brotherhood, together with the landlord, by the
directions and advice of the curate, covered their faces and disguised
themselves, some in one way, some in another, so as to appear to Don
Quixote quite different from the persons he had seen in the castle.
This done, in profound silence they entered the room where he was
asleep, taking his his rest after the past frays, and advancing to
where he was sleeping tranquilly, not dreaming of anything of the kind
happening, they seized him firmly and bound him fast hand and foot, so
that, when he awoke startled, he was unable to move, and could only
marvel and wonder at the strange figures he saw before him; upon which
he at once gave way to the idea which his crazed fancy invariably
conjured up before him, and took it into his head that all these
shapes were phantoms of the enchanted castle, and that he himself was
unquestionably enchanted as he could neither move nor help himself;
precisely what the curate, the concoctor of the scheme, expected would
happen. Of all that were there Sancho was the only one who was at once
in his senses and in his own proper character, and he, though he was
within very little of sharing his master's infirmity, did not fail to
perceive who all these disguised figures were; but he did not dare to
open his lips until he saw what came of this assault and capture of
his master; nor did the latter utter a word, waiting to the upshot of
his mishap; which was that bringing in the cage, they shut him up in
it and nailed the bars so firmly that they could not be easily burst
open. They then took him on their shoulders, and as they passed out of
the room an awful voice--as much so as the barber, not he of the
pack-saddle but the other, was able to make it--was heard to say, "O
Knight of the Rueful Countenance, let not this captivity in which thou
art placed afflict thee, for this must needs be, for the more speedy
accomplishment of the adventure in which thy great heart has engaged
thee; the which shall be accomplished when the raging Manchegan lion
and the white Tobosan dove shall be linked together, having first
humbled their haughty necks to the gentle yoke of matrimony. And from
this marvellous union shall come forth to the light of the world brave
whelps that shall rival the ravening claws of their valiant father;
and this shall come to pass ere the pursuer of the flying nymph shall
in his swift natural course have twice visited the starry signs. And
thou, O most noble and obedient squire that ever bore sword at side,
beard on face, or nose to smell with, be not dismayed or grieved to
see the flower of knight-errantry carried away thus before thy very
eyes; for soon, if it so please the Framer of the universe, thou shalt
see thyself exalted to such a height that thou shalt not know thyself,
and the promises which thy good master has made thee shall not prove
false; and I assure thee, on the authority of the sage Mentironiana,
that thy wages shall be paid thee, as thou shalt see in due season.
Follow then the footsteps of the valiant enchanted knight, for it is
expedient that thou shouldst go to the destination assigned to both of
you; and as it is not permitted to me to say more, God be with thee;
for I return to that place I wot of;" and as he brought the prophecy
to a close he raised his voice to a high pitch, and then lowered it to
such a soft tone, that even those who knew it was all a joke were
almost inclined to take what they heard seriously. Don Quixote was
comforted by the prophecy he heard, for he at once comprehended its
meaning perfectly, and perceived it was promised to him that he should
see himself united in holy and lawful matrimony with his beloved
Dulcinea del Toboso, from whose blessed womb should proceed the
whelps, his sons, to the eternal glory of La Mancha; and being
thoroughly and firmly persuaded of this, he lifted up his voice, and
with a deep sigh exclaimed, "Oh thou, whoever thou art, who hast
foretold me so much good, I implore of thee that on my part thou
entreat that sage enchanter who takes charge of my interests, that he
leave me not to perish in this captivity in which they are now
carrying me away, ere I see fulfilled promises so joyful and
incomparable as those which have been now made me; for, let this but
come to pass, and I shall glory in the pains of my prison, find
comfort in these chains wherewith they bind me, and regard this bed
whereon they stretch me, not as a hard battle-field, but as a soft and
happy nuptial couch; and touching the consolation of Sancho Panza, my
squire, I rely upon his goodness and rectitude that he will not desert
me in good or evil fortune; for if, by his ill luck or mine, it may
not happen to be in my power to give him the island I have promised,
or any equivalent for it, at least his wages shall not be lost; for in
my will, which is already made, I have declared the sum that shall be
paid to him, measured, not by his many faithful services, but by the
means at my disposal." Sancho bowed his head very respectfully and
kissed both his hands, for, being tied together, he could not kiss
one; and then the apparitions lifted the cage upon their shoulders and
fixed it upon the ox-cart. CHAPTER XLVII. OF THE STRANGE MANNER IN
WHICH DON QUIXOTE OF LA MANCHA WAS CARRIED AWAY ENCHANTED, TOGETHER
WITH OTHER REMARKABLE INCIDENTS When Don Quixote saw himself caged and
hoisted on the cart in this way, he said, "Many grave histories of
knights-errant have I read; but never yet have I read, seen, or heard
of their carrying off enchanted knights-errant in this fashion, or at
the slow pace that these lazy, sluggish animals promise; for they
always take them away through the air with marvellous swiftness,
enveloped in a dark thick cloud, or on a chariot of fire, or it may be
on some hippogriff or other beast of the kind; but to carry me off
like this on an ox-cart! By God, it puzzles me! But perhaps the
chivalry and enchantments of our day take a different course from that
of those in days gone by; and it may be, too, that as I am a new
knight in the world, and the first to revive the already forgotten
calling of knight-adventurers, they may have newly invented other
kinds of enchantments and other modes of carrying off the enchanted.
What thinkest thou of the matter, Sancho my son?" "I don't know what
to think," answered Sancho, "not being as well read as your worship in
errant writings; but for all that I venture to say and swear that
these apparitions that are about us are not quite catholic."
"Catholic!" said Don Quixote. "Father of me! how can they be Catholic
when they are all devils that have taken fantastic shapes to come and
do this, and bring me to this condition? And if thou wouldst prove it,
touch them, and feel them, and thou wilt find they have only bodies of
air, and no consistency except in appearance." "By God, master,"
returned Sancho, "I have touched them already; and that devil, that
goes about there so busily, has firm flesh, and another property very
different from what I have heard say devils have, for by all accounts
they all smell of brimstone and other bad smells; but this one smells
of amber half a league off." Sancho was here speaking of Don Fernando,
who, like a gentleman of his rank, was very likely perfumed as Sancho
said. "Marvel not at that, Sancho my friend," said Don Quixote; "for
let me tell thee devils are crafty; and even if they do carry odours
about with them, they themselves have no smell, because they are
spirits; or, if they have any smell, they cannot smell of anything
sweet, but of something foul and fetid; and the reason is that as they
carry hell with them wherever they go, and can get no ease whatever
from their torments, and as a sweet smell is a thing that gives
pleasure and enjoyment, it is impossible that they can smell sweet;
if, then, this devil thou speakest of seems to thee to smell of amber,
either thou art deceiving thyself, or he wants to deceive thee by
making thee fancy he is not a devil." Such was the conversation that
passed between master and man; and Don Fernando and Cardenio,
apprehensive of Sancho's making a complete discovery of their scheme,
towards which he had already gone some way, resolved to hasten their
departure, and calling the landlord aside, they directed him to saddle
Rocinante and put the pack-saddle on Sancho's ass, which he did with
great alacrity. In the meantime the curate had made an arrangement
with the officers that they should bear them company as far as his
village, he paying them so much a day. Cardenio hung the buckler on
one side of the bow of Rocinante's saddle and the basin on the other,
and by signs commanded Sancho to mount his ass and take Rocinante's
bridle, and at each side of the cart he placed two officers with their
muskets; but before the cart was put in motion, out came the landlady
and her daughter and Maritornes to bid Don Quixote farewell,
pretending to weep with grief at his misfortune; and to them Don
Quixote said: "Weep not, good ladies, for all these mishaps are the
lot of those who follow the profession I profess; and if these
reverses did not befall me I should not esteem myself a famous
knight-errant; for such things never happen to knights of little
renown and fame, because nobody in the world thinks about them; to
valiant knights they do, for these are envied for their virtue and
valour by many princes and other knights who compass the destruction
of the worthy by base means. Nevertheless, virtue is of herself so
mighty, that, in spite of all the magic that Zoroaster its first
inventor knew, she will come victorious out of every trial, and shed
her light upon the earth as the sun does upon the heavens. Forgive me,
fair ladies, if, through inadvertence, I have in aught offended you;
for intentionally and wittingly I have never done so to any; and pray
to God that he deliver me from this captivity to which some malevolent
enchanter has consigned me; and should I find myself released
therefrom, the favours that ye have bestowed upon me in this castle
shall be held in memory by me, that I may acknowledge, recognise, and
requite them as they deserve." While this was passing between the
ladies of the castle and Don Quixote, the curate and the barber bade
farewell to Don Fernando and his companions, to the captain, his
brother, and the ladies, now all made happy, and in particular to
Dorothea and Luscinda. They all embraced one another, and promised to
let each other know how things went with them, and Don Fernando
directed the curate where to write to him, to tell him what became of
Don Quixote, assuring him that there was nothing that could give him
more pleasure than to hear of it, and that he too, on his part, would
send him word of everything he thought he would like to know, about
his marriage, Zoraida's baptism, Don Luis's affair, and Luscinda's
return to her home. The curate promised to comply with his request
carefully, and they embraced once more, and renewed their promises.
The landlord approached the curate and handed him some papers, saying
he had discovered them in the lining of the valise in which the novel
of "The Ill-advised Curiosity" had been found, and that he might take
them all away with him as their owner had not since returned; for, as
he could not read, he did not want them himself. The curate thanked
him, and opening them he saw at the beginning of the manuscript the
words, "Novel of Rinconete and Cortadillo," by which he perceived that
it was a novel, and as that of "The Ill-advised Curiosity" had been
good he concluded this would be so too, as they were both probably by
the same author; so he kept it, intending to read it when he had an
opportunity. He then mounted and his friend the barber did the same,
both masked, so as not to be recognised by Don Quixote, and set out
following in the rear of the cart. The order of march was this: first
went the cart with the owner leading it; at each side of it marched
the officers of the Brotherhood, as has been said, with their muskets;
then followed Sancho Panza on his ass, leading Rocinante by the
bridle; and behind all came the curate and the barber on their mighty
mules, with faces covered, as aforesaid, and a grave and serious air,
measuring their pace to suit the slow steps of the oxen. Don Quixote
was seated in the cage, with his hands tied and his feet stretched
out, leaning against the bars as silent and as patient as if he were a
stone statue and not a man of flesh. Thus slowly and silently they
made, it might be, two leagues, until they reached a valley which the
carter thought a convenient place for resting and feeding his oxen,
and he said so to the curate, but the barber was of opinion that they
ought to push on a little farther, as at the other side of a hill
which appeared close by he knew there was a valley that had more grass
and much better than the one where they proposed to halt; and his
advice was taken and they continued their journey. Just at that moment
the curate, looking back, saw coming on behind them six or seven
mounted men, well found and equipped, who soon overtook them, for they
were travelling, not at the sluggish, deliberate pace of oxen, but
like men who rode canons' mules, and in haste to take their noontide
rest as soon as possible at the inn which was in sight not a league
off. The quick travellers came up with the slow, and courteous
salutations were exchanged; and one of the new comers, who was, in
fact, a canon of Toledo and master of the others who accompanied him,
observing the regular order of the procession, the cart, the officers,
Sancho, Rocinante, the curate and the barber, and above all Don
Quixote caged and confined, could not help asking what was the meaning
of carrying the man in that fashion; though, from the badges of the
officers, he already concluded that he must be some desperate
highwayman or other malefactor whose punishment fell within the
jurisdiction of the Holy Brotherhood. One of the officers to whom he
had put the question, replied, "Let the gentleman himself tell you the
meaning of his going this way, senor, for we do not know." Don Quixote
overheard the conversation and said, "Haply, gentlemen, you are versed
and learned in matters of errant chivalry? Because if you are I will
tell you my misfortunes; if not, there is no good in my giving myself
the trouble of relating them;" but here the curate and the barber,
seeing that the travellers were engaged in conversation with Don
Quixote, came forward, in order to answer in such a way as to save
their stratagem from being discovered. The canon, replying to Don
Quixote, said, "In truth, brother, I know more about books of chivalry
than I do about Villalpando's elements of logic; so if that be all,
you may safely tell me what you please." "In God's name, then, senor,"
replied Don Quixote; "if that be so, I would have you know that I am
held enchanted in this cage by the envy and fraud of wicked
enchanters; for virtue is more persecuted by the wicked than loved by
the good. I am a knight-errant, and not one of those whose names Fame
has never thought of immortalising in her record, but of those who, in
defiance and in spite of envy itself, and all the magicians that
Persia, or Brahmans that India, or Gymnosophists that Ethiopia ever
produced, will place their names in the temple of immortality, to
serve as examples and patterns for ages to come, whereby
knights-errant may see the footsteps in which they must tread if they
would attain the summit and crowning point of honour in arms." "What
Senor Don Quixote of La Mancha says," observed the curate, "is the
truth; for he goes enchanted in this cart, not from any fault or sins
of his, but because of the malevolence of those to whom virtue is
odious and valour hateful. This, senor, is the Knight of the Rueful
Countenance, if you have ever heard him named, whose valiant
achievements and mighty deeds shall be written on lasting brass and
imperishable marble, notwithstanding all the efforts of envy to
obscure them and malice to hide them." When the canon heard both the
prisoner and the man who was at liberty talk in such a strain he was
ready to cross himself in his astonishment, and could not make out
what had befallen him; and all his attendants were in the same state
of amazement. At this point Sancho Panza, who had drawn near to hear
the conversation, said, in order to make everything plain, "Well,
sirs, you may like or dislike what I am going to say, but the fact of
the matter is, my master, Don Quixote, is just as much enchanted as my
mother. He is in his full senses, he eats and he drinks, and he has
his calls like other men and as he had yesterday, before they caged
him. And if that's the case, what do they mean by wanting me to
believe that he is enchanted? For I have heard many a one say that
enchanted people neither eat, nor sleep, nor talk; and my master, if
you don't stop him, will talk more than thirty lawyers." Then turning
to the curate he exclaimed, "Ah, senor curate, senor curate! do you
think I don't know you? Do you think I don't guess and see the drift
of these new enchantments? Well then, I can tell you I know you, for
all your face is covered, and I can tell you I am up to you, however
you may hide your tricks. After all, where envy reigns virtue cannot
live, and where there is niggardliness there can be no liberality. Ill
betide the devil! if it had not been for your worship my master would
be married to the Princess Micomicona this minute, and I should be a
count at least; for no less was to be expected, as well from the
goodness of my master, him of the Rueful Countenance, as from the
greatness of my services. But I see now how true it is what they say
in these parts, that the wheel of fortune turns faster than a
mill-wheel, and that those who were up yesterday are down to-day. I am
sorry for my wife and children, for when they might fairly and
reasonably expect to see their father return to them a governor or
viceroy of some island or kingdom, they will see him come back a
horse-boy. I have said all this, senor curate, only to urge your
paternity to lay to your conscience your ill-treatment of my master;
and have a care that God does not call you to account in another life
for making a prisoner of him in this way, and charge against you all
the succours and good deeds that my lord Don Quixote leaves undone
while he is shut up. "Trim those lamps there!" exclaimed the barber at
this; "so you are of the same fraternity as your master, too, Sancho?
By God, I begin to see that you will have to keep him company in the
cage, and be enchanted like him for having caught some of his humour
and chivalry. It was an evil hour when you let yourself be got with
child by his promises, and that island you long so much for found its
way into your head." "I am not with child by anyone," returned Sancho,
"nor am I a man to let myself be got with child, if it was by the King
himself. Though I am poor I am an old Christian, and I owe nothing to
nobody, and if I long for an island, other people long for worse. Each
of us is the son of his own works; and being a man I may come to be
pope, not to say governor of an island, especially as my master may
win so many that he will not know whom to give them to. Mind how you
talk, master barber; for shaving is not everything, and there is some
difference between Peter and Peter. I say this because we all know one
another, and it will not do to throw false dice with me; I am an old
dog, and I know all about 'tus, tus;' I can be wide-awake if need be,
and I don't let clouds come before my eyes, for I know where the shoe
pinches me; I say so, because with me the good will have support and
protection, and the bad neither footing nor access. And it seems to me
that, in governments, to make a beginning is everything; and maybe,
after having been governor a fortnight, I'll take kindly to the work
and know more about it than the field labour I have been brought up
to." "You are right, Sancho," said the duchess, "for no one is born
ready taught, and the bishops are made out of men and not out of
stones. But to return to the subject we were discussing just now, the
enchantment of the lady Dulcinea, I look upon it as certain, and
something more than evident, that Sancho's idea of practising a
deception upon his master, making him believe that Dulcinea was
enchanted and turned into a country wench; and of how the duchess, his
wife, had persuaded Sancho that it was he himself who was deceived,
inasmuch as Dulcinea was really enchanted; at which the bachelor
laughed not a little, and marvelled as well at the sharpness and
simplicity of Sancho as at the length to which Don Quixote's madness
went. The duke begged of him if he found him (whether he overcame him
or not) to return that way and let him know the result. This the
bachelor did; he set out in quest of Don Quixote, and not finding him
at Saragossa, he went on, and how he fared has been already told. He
returned to the duke's castle and told him all, what the conditions of
the combat were, and how Don Quixote was now, like a loyal
knight-errant, returning to keep his promise of retiring to his
village for a year, by which time, said the bachelor, he might perhaps
be cured of his madness; for that was the object that had led him to
adopt these disguises, as it was a sad thing for a gentleman of such
good parts as Don Quixote to be a madman. And so he took his leave of
the duke, and went home to his village to wait there for Don Quixote,
who was coming after him. Thereupon the duke seized the opportunity of
practising this mystification upon him; so much did he enjoy
everything connected with Sancho and Don Quixote. He had the roads
about the castle far and near, everywhere he thought Don Quixote was
likely to pass on his return, occupied by large numbers of his
servants on foot and on horseback, who were to bring him to the
castle, by fair means or foul, if they met him. They did meet him, and
sent word to the duke, who, having already settled what was to be
done, as soon as he heard of his arrival, ordered the torches and
lamps in the court to be lit and Altisidora to be placed on the
catafalque with all the pomp and ceremony that has been described, the
whole affair being so well arranged and acted that it differed but
little from reality. And Cide Hamete says, moreover, that for his part
he considers the concocters of the joke as crazy as the victims of it,
and that the duke and duchess were not two fingers' breadth removed
from being something like fools themselves when they took such pains
to make game of a pair of fools. As for the latter, one was sleeping
soundly and the other lying awake occupied with his desultory
thoughts, when daylight came to them bringing with it the desire to
rise; for the lazy down was never a delight to Don Quixote, victor or
vanquished. Altisidora, come back from death to life as Don Quixote
fancied, following up the freak of her lord and lady, entered the
chamber, crowned with the garland she had worn on the catafalque and
in a robe of white taffeta embroidered with gold flowers, her hair
flowing loose over her shoulders, and leaning upon a staff of fine
black ebony. Don Quixote, disconcerted and in confusion at her
appearance, huddled himself up and well-nigh covered himself
altogether with the sheets and counterpane of the bed, tongue-tied,
and unable to offer her any civility. Altisidora seated herself on a
chair at the head of the bed, and, after a deep sigh, said to him in a
feeble, soft voice, "When women of rank and modest maidens trample
honour under foot, and give a loose to the tongue that breaks through
every impediment, publishing abroad the inmost secrets of their
hearts, they are reduced to sore extremities. Such a one am I, Senor
Don Quixote of La Mancha, crushed, conquered, love-smitten, but yet
patient under suffering and virtuous, and so much so that my heart
broke with grief and I lost my life. For the last two days I have been
dead, slain by the thought of the cruelty with which thou hast treated
me, obdurate knight, O harder thou than marble to my plaint; or at
least believed to be dead by all who saw me; and had it not been that
Love, taking pity on me, let my recovery rest upon the sufferings of
this good squire, there I should have remained in the other world."
"Love might very well have let it rest upon the sufferings of my ass,
and I should have been obliged to him," said Sancho. "But tell me,
senora--and may heaven send you a tenderer lover than my master-what
did you see in the other world? What goes on in hell? For of course
that's where one who dies in despair is bound for." "To tell you the
truth," said Altisidora, "I cannot have died outright, for I did not
go into hell; had I gone in, it is very certain I should never have
come out again, do what I might. The truth is, I came to the gate,
where some dozen or so of devils were playing tennis, all in breeches
and doublets, with falling collars trimmed with Flemish bonelace, and
ruffles of the same that served them for wristbands, with four
fingers' breadth of the arms exposed to make their hands look longer;
in their hands they held rackets of fire; but what amazed me still
more was that books, apparently full of wind and rubbish, served them
for tennis balls, a strange and marvellous thing; this, however, did
not astonish me so much as to observe that, although with players it
is usual for the winners to be glad and the losers sorry, there in
that game all were growling, all were snarling, and all were cursing
one another." "That's no wonder," said Sancho; "for devils, whether
playing or not, can never be content, win or lose." "Very likely,"
said Altisidora; "but there is another thing that surprises me too, I
mean surprised me then, and that was that no ball outlasted the first
throw or was of any use a second time; and it was wonderful the
constant succession there was of books, new and old. To one of them, a
brand-new, well-bound one, they gave such a stroke that they knocked
the guts out of it and scattered the leaves about. 'Look what book
that is,' said one devil to another, and the other replied, 'It is the
"Second Part of the History of Don Quixote of La Mancha," not by Cide
Hamete, the original author, but by an Aragonese who by his own
account is of Tordesillas.' 'Out of this with it,' said the first,
'and into the depths of hell with it out of my sight.' 'Is it so bad?'
said the other. 'So bad is it,' said the first, 'that if I had set
myself deliberately to make a worse, I could not have done it.' They
then went on with their game, knocking other books about; and I,
having heard them mention the name of Don Quixote whom I love and
adore so, took care to retain this vision in my memory." "A vision it
must have been, no doubt," said Don Quixote, "for there is no other I
in the world; this history has been going about here for some time
from hand to hand, but it does not stay long in any, for everybody
gives it a taste of his foot. I am not disturbed by hearing that I am
wandering in a fantastic shape in the darkness of the pit or in the
daylight above, for I am not the one that history treats of. If it
should be good, faithful, and true, it will have ages of life; but if
it should be bad, from its birth to its burial will not be a very long
journey." Altisidora was about to proceed with her complaint against
Don Quixote, when he said to her, "I have several times told you,
senora that it grieves me you should have set your affections upon me,
as from mine they can only receive gratitude, but no return. I was
born to belong to Dulcinea del Toboso, and the fates, if there are
any, dedicated me to her; and to suppose that any other beauty can
take the place she occupies in my heart is to suppose an
impossibility. This frank declaration should suffice to make you
retire within the bounds of your modesty, for no one can bind himself
to do impossibilities." Hearing this, Altisidora, with a show of anger
and agitation, exclaimed, "God's life! Don Stockfish, soul of a
mortar, stone of a date, more obstinate and obdurate than a clown
asked a favour when he has his mind made up, if I fall upon you I'll
tear your eyes out! Do you fancy, Don Vanquished, Don Cudgelled, that
I died for your sake? All that you have seen to-night has been
make-believe; I'm not the woman to let the black of my nail suffer for
such a camel, much less die!" "That I can well believe," said Sancho;
"for all that about lovers pining to death is absurd; they may talk of
it, but as for doing it-Judas may believe that!" While they were
talking, the musician, singer, and poet, who had sung the two stanzas
given above came in, and making a profound obeisance to Don Quixote
said, "Will your worship, sir knight, reckon and retain me in the
number of your most faithful servants, for I have long been a great
admirer of yours, as well because of your fame as because of your
achievements?" "Will your worship tell me who you are," replied Don
Quixote, "so that my courtesy may be answerable to your deserts?" The
young man replied that he was the musician and songster of the night
before. "Of a truth," said Don Quixote, "your worship has a most
excellent voice; but what you sang did not seem to me very much to the
purpose; for what have Garcilasso's stanzas to do with the death of
this lady?" "Don't be surprised at that," returned the musician; "for
with the callow poets of our day the way is for every one to write as
he pleases and pilfer where he chooses, whether it be germane to the
matter or not, and now-a-days there is no piece of silliness they can
sing or write that is not set down to poetic licence." Don Quixote was
about to reply, but was prevented by the duke and duchess, who came in
to see him, and with them there followed a long and delightful
conversation, in the course of which Sancho said so many droll and
saucy things that he left the duke and duchess wondering not only at
his simplicity but at his sharpness. Don Quixote begged their
permission to take his departure that same day, inasmuch as for a
vanquished knight like himself it was fitter he should live in a
pig-sty than in a royal palace. They gave it very readily, and the
duchess asked him if Altisidora was in his good graces. He replied,
"Senora, let me tell your ladyship that this damsel's ailment comes
entirely of idleness, and the cure for it is honest and constant
employment. She herself has told me that lace is worn in hell; and as
she must know how to make it, let it never be out of her hands; for
when she is occupied in shifting the bobbins to and fro, the image or
images of what she loves will not shift to and fro in her thoughts;
this is the truth, this is my opinion, and this is my advice." "And
mine," added Sancho; "for I never in all my life saw or heard anything
more natural.' 'Those praises and compliments belong to you more
justly than to me, gossip,' said the inventor of the plan; 'for, by
the God that made me, you might give a couple of brays odds to the
best and most finished brayer in the world; the tone you have got is
deep, your voice is well kept up as to time and pitch, and your
finishing notes come thick and fast; in fact, I own myself beaten, and
yield the palm to you, and give in to you in this rare
accomplishment.' 'Well then,' said the owner, 'I'll set a higher value
on myself for the future, and consider that I know something, as I
have an excellence of some sort; for though I always thought I brayed
well, I never supposed I came up to the pitch of perfection you say.'
'And I say too,' said the second, 'that there are rare gifts going to
loss in the world, and that they are ill bestowed upon those who don't
know how to make use of them.' 'Ours,' said the owner of the ass,
'unless it is in cases like this we have now in hand, cannot be of any
service to us, and even in this God grant they may be of some use.' So
saying they separated, and took to their braying once more, but every
instant they were deceiving one another, and coming to meet one
another again, until they arranged by way of countersign, so as to
know that it was they and not the ass, to give two brays, one after
the other. In this way, doubling the brays at every step, they made
the complete circuit of the forest, but the lost ass never gave them
an answer or even the sign of one. How could the poor ill-starred
brute have answered, when, in the thickest part of the forest, they
found him devoured by wolves? As soon as he saw him his owner said, 'I
was wondering he did not answer, for if he wasn't dead he'd have
brayed when he heard us, or he'd have been no ass; but for the sake of
having heard you bray to such perfection, gossip, I count the trouble
I have taken to look for him well bestowed, even though I have found
him dead.' 'It's in a good hand, gossip,' said the other; 'if the
abbot sings well, the acolyte is not much behind him.' So they
returned disconsolate and hoarse to their village, where they told
their friends, neighbours, and acquaintances what had befallen them in
their search for the ass, each crying up the other's perfection in
braying. The whole story came to be known and spread abroad through
the villages of the neighbourhood; and the devil, who never sleeps,
with his love for sowing dissensions and scattering discord
everywhere, blowing mischief about and making quarrels out of nothing,
contrived to make the people of the other towns fall to braying
whenever they saw anyone from our village, as if to throw the braying
of our regidors in our teeth. Then the boys took to it, which was the
same thing for it as getting into the hands and mouths of all the
devils of hell; and braying spread from one town to another in such a
way that the men of the braying town are as easy to be known as blacks
are to be known from whites, and the unlucky joke has gone so far that
several times the scoffed have come out in arms and in a body to do
battle with the scoffers, and neither king nor rook, fear nor shame,
can mend matters. To-morrow or the day after, I believe, the men of my
town, that is, of the braying town, are going to take the field
against another village two leagues away from ours, one of those that
persecute us most; and that we may turn out well prepared I have
bought these lances and halberds you have seen. These are the curious
things I told you I had to tell, and if you don't think them so, I
have got no others;" and with this the worthy fellow brought his story
to a close. Just at this moment there came in at the gate of the inn a
man entirely clad in chamois leather, hose, breeches, and doublet, who
said in a loud voice, "Senor host, have you room? Here's the divining
ape and the show of the Release of Melisendra just coming." "Ods
body!" said the landlord, "why, it's Master Pedro! We're in for a
grand night!" I forgot to mention that the said Master Pedro had his
left eye and nearly half his cheek covered with a patch of green
taffety, showing that something ailed all that side. "Your worship is
welcome, Master Pedro," continued the landlord; "but where are the ape
and the show, for I don't see them?" "They are close at hand," said he
in the chamois leather, "but I came on first to know if there was any
room." "I'd make the Duke of Alva himself clear out to make room for
Master Pedro," said the landlord; "bring in the ape and the show;
there's company in the inn to-night that will pay to see that and the
cleverness of the ape." "So be it by all means," said the duchess;
"tomorrow I'll give you a scourge that will be just the thing for you,
and will accommodate itself to the tenderness of your flesh, as if it
was its own sister." Then said Sancho, "Your highness must know, dear
lady of my soul, that I have a letter written to my wife, Teresa
Panza, giving her an account of all that has happened me since I left
her; I have it here in my bosom, and there's nothing wanting but to
put the address to it; I'd be glad if your discretion would read it,
for I think it runs in the governor style; I mean the way governors
ought to write." "And who dictated it?" asked the duchess. "Who should
have dictated but myself, sinner as I am?" said Sancho. "And did you
write it yourself?" said the duchess. "That I didn't," said Sancho;
"for I can neither read nor write, though I can sign my name." "Let us
see it," said the duchess, "for never fear but you display in it the
quality and quantity of your wit." Sancho drew out an open letter from
his bosom, and the duchess, taking it, found it ran in this fashion:
SANCHO PANZA'S LETTER TO HIS WIFE, TERESA PANZA If I was well whipped
I went mounted like a gentleman; if I have got a good government it is
at the cost of a good whipping. Thou wilt not understand this just
now, my Teresa; by-and-by thou wilt know what it means. I may tell
thee, Teresa, I mean thee to go in a coach, for that is a matter of
importance, because every other way of going is going on all-fours.
Thou art a governor's wife; take care that nobody speaks evil of thee
behind thy back. I send thee here a green hunting suit that my lady
the duchess gave me; alter it so as to make a petticoat and bodice for
our daughter. Don Quixote, my master, if I am to believe what I hear
in these parts, is a madman of some sense, and a droll blockhead, and
I am no way behind him. We have been in the cave of Montesinos, and
the sage Merlin has laid hold of me for the disenchantment of Dulcinea
del Toboso, her that is called Aldonza Lorenzo over there. With three
thousand three hundred lashes, less five, that I'm to give myself, she
will be left as entirely disenchanted as the mother that bore her. Say
nothing of this to anyone; for, make thy affairs public, and some will
say they are white and others will say they are black. I shall leave
this in a few days for my government, to which I am going with a
mighty great desire to make money, for they tell me all new governors
set out with the same desire; I will feel the pulse of it and will let
thee know if thou art to come and live with me or not. Dapple is well
and sends many remembrances to thee; I am not going to leave him
behind though they took me away to be Grand Turk. My lady the duchess
kisses thy hands a thousand times; do thou make a return with two
thousand, for as my master says, nothing costs less or is cheaper than
civility. God has not been pleased to provide another valise for me
with another hundred crowns, like the one the other day; but never
mind, my Teresa, the bell-ringer is in safe quarters, and all will
come out in the scouring of the government; only it troubles me
greatly what they tell me--that once I have tasted it I will eat my
hands off after it; and if that is so it will not come very cheap to
me; though to be sure the maimed have a benefice of their own in the
alms they beg for; so that one way or another thou wilt be rich and in
luck. God give it to thee as he can, and keep me to serve thee. From
this castle, the 20th of July, 1614. Thy husband, the governor. SANCHO
PANZA When she had done reading the letter the duchess said to Sancho,
"On two points the worthy governor goes rather astray; one is in
saying or hinting that this government has been bestowed upon him for
the lashes that he is to give himself, when he knows (and he cannot
deny it) that when my lord the duke promised it to him nobody ever
dreamt of such a thing as lashes; the other is that he shows himself
here to be very covetous; and I would not have him a money-seeker, for
'covetousness bursts the bag,' and the covetous governor does
ungoverned justice." "I don't mean it that way, senora," said Sancho;
"and if you think the letter doesn't run as it ought to do, it's only
to tear it up and make another; and maybe it will be a worse one if it
is left to my gumption." "No, no," said the duchess, "this one will
do, and I wish the duke to see it." With this they betook themselves
to a garden where they were to dine, and the duchess showed Sancho's
letter to the duke, who was highly delighted with it. They dined, and
after the cloth had been removed and they had amused themselves for a
while with Sancho's rich conversation, the melancholy sound of a fife
and harsh discordant drum made itself heard. All seemed somewhat put
out by this dull, confused, martial harmony, especially Don Quixote,
who could not keep his seat from pure disquietude; as to Sancho, it is
needless to say that fear drove him to his usual refuge, the side or
the skirts of the duchess; and indeed and in truth the sound they
heard was a most doleful and melancholy one. While they were still in
uncertainty they saw advancing towards them through the garden two men
clad in mourning robes so long and flowing that they trailed upon the
ground. As they marched they beat two great drums which were likewise
draped in black, and beside them came the fife player, black and
sombre like the others. Following these came a personage of gigantic
stature enveloped rather than clad in a gown of the deepest black, the
skirt of which was of prodigious dimensions. Over the gown, girdling
or crossing his figure, he had a broad baldric which was also black,
and from which hung a huge scimitar with a black scabbard and
furniture. He had his face covered with a transparent black veil,
through which might be descried a very long beard as white as snow. He
came on keeping step to the sound of the drums with great gravity and
dignity; and, in short, his stature, his gait, the sombreness of his
appearance and his following might well have struck with astonishment,
as they did, all who beheld him without knowing who he was. With this
measured pace and in this guise he advanced to kneel before the duke,
who, with the others, awaited him standing. The duke, however, would
not on any account allow him to speak until he had risen. The
prodigious scarecrow obeyed, and standing up, removed the veil from
his face and disclosed the most enormous, the longest, the whitest and
the thickest beard that human eyes had ever beheld until that moment,
and then fetching up a grave, sonorous voice from the depths of his
broad, capacious chest, and fixing his eyes on the duke, he said:
"Most high and mighty senor, my name is Trifaldin of the White Beard;
I am squire to the Countess Trifaldi, otherwise called the Distressed
Duenna, on whose behalf I bear a message to your highness, which is
that your magnificence will be pleased to grant her leave and
permission to come and tell you her trouble, which is one of the
strangest and most wonderful that the mind most familiar with trouble
in the world could have imagined; but first she desires to know if the
valiant and never vanquished knight, Don Quixote of La Mancha, is in
this your castle, for she has come in quest of him on foot and without
breaking her fast from the kingdom of Kandy to your realms here; a
thing which may and ought to be regarded as a miracle or set down to
enchantment; she is even now at the gate of this fortress or
plaisance, and only waits for your permission to enter. I have
spoken." And with that he coughed, and stroked down his beard with
both his hands, and stood very tranquilly waiting for the response of
the duke, which was to this effect: "Many days ago, worthy squire
Trifaldin of the White Beard, we heard of the misfortune of my lady
the Countess Trifaldi, whom the enchanters have caused to be called
the Distressed Duenna. Bid her enter, O stupendous squire, and tell
her that the valiant knight Don Quixote of La Mancha is here, and from
his generous disposition she may safely promise herself every
protection and assistance; and you may tell her, too, that if my aid
be necessary it will not be withheld, for I am bound to give it to her
by my quality of knight, which involves the protection of women of all
sorts, especially widowed, wronged, and distressed dames, such as her
ladyship seems to be." On hearing this Trifaldin bent the knee to the
ground, and making a sign to the fifer and drummers to strike up, he
turned and marched out of the garden to the same notes and at the same
pace as when he entered, leaving them all amazed at his bearing and
solemnity. Turning to Don Quixote, the duke said, "After all, renowned
knight, the mists of malice and ignorance are unable to hide or
obscure the light of valour and virtue. I say so, because your
excellence has been barely six days in this castle, and already the
unhappy and the afflicted come in quest of you from lands far distant
and remote, and not in coaches or on dromedaries, but on foot and
fasting, confident that in that mighty arm they will find a cure for
their sorrows and troubles; thanks to your great achievements, which
are circulated all over the known earth." "I wish, senor duke,"
replied Don Quixote, "that blessed ecclesiastic, who at table the
other day showed such ill-will and bitter spite against
knights-errant, were here now to see with his own eyes whether knights
of the sort are needed in the world; he would at any rate learn by
experience that those suffering any extraordinary affliction or
sorrow, in extreme cases and unusual misfortunes do not go to look for
a remedy to the houses of jurists or village sacristans, or to the
knight who has never attempted to pass the bounds of his own town, or
to the indolent courtier who only seeks for news to repeat and talk
of, instead of striving to do deeds and exploits for others to relate
and record. Relief in distress, help in need, protection for damsels,
consolation for widows, are to be found in no sort of persons better
than in knights-errant; and I give unceasing thanks to heaven that I
am one, and regard any misfortune or suffering that may befall me in
the pursuit of so honourable a calling as endured to good purpose. Let
this duenna come and ask what she will, for I will effect her relief
by the might of my arm and the dauntless resolution of my bold heart."
CHAPTER XXXVII. WHEREIN IS CONTINUED THE NOTABLE ADVENTURE OF THE
DISTRESSED DUENNA The duke and duchess were extremely glad to see how
readily Don Quixote fell in with their scheme; but at this moment
Sancho observed, "I hope this senora duenna won't be putting any
difficulties in the way of the promise of my government; for I have
heard a Toledo apothecary, who talked like a goldfinch, say that where
duennas were mixed up nothing good could happen. God bless me, how he
hated them, that same apothecary! And so what I'm thinking is, if all
duennas, of whatever sort or condition they may be, are plagues and
busybodies, what must they be that are distressed, like this Countess
Three-skirts or Three-tails!--for in my country skirts or tails, tails
or skirts, it's all one." "Hush, friend Sancho," said Don Quixote;
"since this lady duenna comes in quest of me from such a distant land
she cannot be one of those the apothecary meant; moreover this is a
countess, and when countesses serve as duennas it is in the service of
queens and empresses, for in their own houses they are mistresses
paramount and have other duennas to wait on them." To this Dona
Rodriguez, who was present, made answer, "My lady the duchess has
duennas in her service that might be countesses if it was the will of
fortune; 'but laws go as kings like;' let nobody speak ill of duennas,
above all of ancient maiden ones; for though I am not one myself, I
know and am aware of the advantage a maiden duenna has over one that
is a widow; but 'he who clipped us has kept the scissors.'" "For all
that," said Sancho, "there's so much to be clipped about duennas, so
my barber said, that 'it will be better not to stir the rice even
though it sticks.'" "These squires," returned Dona Rodriguez, "are
always our enemies; and as they are the haunting spirits of the
antechambers and watch us at every step, whenever they are not saying
their prayers (and that's often enough) they spend their time in
tattling about us, digging up our bones and burying our good name. But
I can tell these walking blocks that we will live in spite of them,
and in great houses too, though we die of hunger and cover our flesh,
be it delicate or not, with widow's weeds, as one covers or hides a
dunghill on a procession day. By my faith, if it were permitted me and
time allowed, I could prove, not only to those here present, but to
all the world, that there is no virtue that is not to be found in a
duenna." "I have no doubt," said the duchess, "that my good Dona
Rodriguez is right, and very much so; but she had better bide her time
for fighting her own battle and that of the rest of the duennas, so as
to crush the calumny of that vile apothecary, and root out the
prejudice in the great Sancho Panza's mind." To which Sancho replied,
"Ever since I have sniffed the governorship I have got rid of the
humours of a squire, and I don't care a wild fig for all the duennas
in the world." They would have carried on this duenna dispute further
had they not heard the notes of the fife and drums once more, from
which they concluded that the Distressed Duenna was making her
entrance. The duchess asked the duke if it would be possible to oblige
him with a pad of some kind, or a cushion; even if it were off the
couch of his lady the duchess, or the bed of one of the pages; as the
haunches of that horse were more like marble than wood. On this the
Trifaldi observed that Clavileno would not bear any kind of harness or
trappings, and that his best plan would be to sit sideways like a
woman, as in that way he would not feel the hardness so much. Sancho
did so, and, bidding them farewell, allowed his eyes to be bandaged,
but immediately afterwards uncovered them again, and looking tenderly
and tearfully on those in the garden, bade them help him in his
present strait with plenty of Paternosters and Ave Marias, that God
might provide some one to say as many for them, whenever they found
themselves in a similar emergency. At this Don Quixote exclaimed, "Art
thou on the gallows, thief, or at thy last moment, to use pitiful
entreaties of that sort? Cowardly, spiritless creature, art thou not
in the very place the fair Magalona occupied, and from which she
descended, not into the grave, but to become Queen of France; unless
the histories lie? And I who am here beside thee, may I not put myself
on a par with the valiant Pierres, who pressed this very spot that I
now press? Cover thine eyes, cover thine eyes, abject animal, and let
not thy fear escape thy lips, at least in my presence." "Blindfold
me," said Sancho; "as you won't let me commend myself or be commended
to God, is it any wonder if I am afraid there is a region of devils
about here that will carry us off to Peralvillo?" They were then
blindfolded, and Don Quixote, finding himself settled to his
satisfaction, felt for the peg, and the instant he placed his fingers
on it, all the duennas and all who stood by lifted up their voices
exclaiming, "God guide thee, valiant knight! God be with thee,
intrepid squire! Now, now ye go cleaving the air more swiftly than an
arrow! Now ye begin to amaze and astonish all who are gazing at you
from the earth! Take care not to wobble about, valiant Sancho! Mind
thou fall not, for thy fall will be worse than that rash youth's who
tried to steer the chariot of his father the Sun!" As Sancho heard the
voices, clinging tightly to his master and winding his arms round him,
he said, "Senor, how do they make out we are going up so high, if
their voices reach us here and they seem to be speaking quite close to
us?" "Don't mind that, Sancho," said Don Quixote; "for as affairs of
this sort, and flights like this are out of the common course of
things, you can see and hear as much as you like a thousand leagues
off; but don't squeeze me so tight or thou wilt upset me; and really I
know not what thou hast to be uneasy or frightened at, for I can
safely swear I never mounted a smoother-going steed all the days of my
life; one would fancy we never stirred from one place. Banish fear, my
friend, for indeed everything is going as it ought, and we have the
wind astern." "That's true," said Sancho, "for such a strong wind
comes against me on this side, that it seems as if people were blowing
on me with a thousand pair of bellows;" which was the case; they were
puffing at him with a great pair of bellows; for the whole adventure
was so well planned by the duke, the duchess, and their majordomo,
that nothing was omitted to make it perfectly successful. Don Quixote
now, feeling the blast, said, "Beyond a doubt, Sancho, we must have
already reached the second region of the air, where the hail and snow
are generated; the thunder, the lightning, and the thunderbolts are
engendered in the third region, and if we go on ascending at this
rate, we shall shortly plunge into the region of fire, and I know not
how to regulate this peg, so as not to mount up where we shall be
burned." And now they began to warm their faces, from a distance, with
tow that could be easily set on fire and extinguished again, fixed on
the end of a cane. On feeling the heat Sancho said, "May I die if we
are not already in that fire place, or very near it, for a good part
of my beard has been singed, and I have a mind, senor, to uncover and
see whereabouts we are." "Do nothing of the kind," said Don Quixote;
"I have only to command, and he will obey me; and as he has sworn to
me by the order of knighthood which he has received, I leave him free,
and I guarantee the payment." "Consider what you are saying, senor,"
said the youth; "this master of mine is not a knight, nor has he
received any order of knighthood; for he is Juan Haldudo the Rich, of
Quintanar." "That matters little," replied Don Quixote; "there may be
Haldudos knights; moreover, everyone is the son of his works." "That
is true," said Andres; "but this master of mine--of what works is he
the son, when he refuses me the wages of my sweat and labour?" "I do
not refuse, brother Andres," said the farmer, "be good enough to come
along with me, and I swear by all the orders of knighthood there are
in the world to pay you as I have agreed, real by real, and perfumed."
"For the perfumery I excuse you," said Don Quixote; "give it to him in
reals, and I shall be satisfied; and see that you do as you have
sworn; if not, by the same oath I swear to come back and hunt you out
and punish you; and I shall find you though you should lie closer than
a lizard. And if you desire to know who it is lays this command upon
you, that you be more firmly bound to obey it, know that I am the
valorous Don Quixote of La Mancha, the undoer of injustice, the
righter of wrongs, the protector of damsels, the terror of giants, and
the winner of battles?" "That," said the goatherd, "sounds like what
one reads in the books of the knights-errant, who did all that you say
this man does; though it is my belief that either you are joking, or
else this gentleman has empty lodgings in his head." "You are a great
scoundrel," said Don Quixote, "and it is you who are empty and a fool.
I am fuller than ever was the whoreson bitch that bore you;" and
passing from words to deeds, he caught up a loaf that was near him and
sent it full in the goatherd's face, with such force that he flattened
his nose; but the goatherd, who did not understand jokes, and found
himself roughly handled in such good earnest, paying no respect to
carpet, tablecloth, or diners, sprang upon Don Quixote, and seizing
him by the throat with both hands would no doubt have throttled him,
had not Sancho Panza that instant come to the rescue, and grasping him
by the shoulders flung him down on the table, smashing plates,
breaking glasses, and upsetting and scattering everything on it. Don
Quixote, finding himself free, strove to get on top of the goatherd,
who, with his face covered with blood, and soundly kicked by Sancho,
was on all fours feeling about for one of the table-knives to take a
bloody revenge with. The canon and the curate, however, prevented him,
but the barber so contrived it that he got Don Quixote under him, and
rained down upon him such a shower of fisticuffs that the poor
knight's face streamed with blood as freely as his own. The canon and
the curate were bursting with laughter, the officers were capering
with delight, and both the one and the other hissed them on as they do
dogs that are worrying one another in a fight. Sancho alone was
frantic, for he could not free himself from the grasp of one of the
canon's servants, who kept him from going to his master's assistance.
At last, while they were all, with the exception of the two bruisers
who were mauling each other, in high glee and enjoyment, they heard a
trumpet sound a note so doleful that it made them all look in the
direction whence the sound seemed to come. But the one that was most
excited by hearing it was Don Quixote, who though sorely against his
will he was under the goatherd, and something more than pretty well
pummelled, said to him, "Brother devil (for it is impossible but that
thou must be one since thou hast had might and strength enough to
overcome mine), I ask thee to agree to a truce for but one hour for
the solemn note of yonder trumpet that falls on our ears seems to me
to summon me to some new adventure." The goatherd, who was by this
time tired of pummelling and being pummelled, released him at once,
and Don Quixote rising to his feet and turning his eyes to the quarter
where the sound had been heard, suddenly saw coming down the slope of
a hill several men clad in white like penitents. The fact was that the
clouds had that year withheld their moisture from the earth, and in
all the villages of the district they were organising processions,
rogations, and penances, imploring God to open the hands of his mercy
and send the rain; and to this end the people of a village that was
hard by were going in procession to a holy hermitage there was on one
side of that valley. Don Quixote when he saw the strange garb of the
penitents, without reflecting how often he had seen it before, took it
into his head that this was a case of adventure, and that it fell to
him alone as a knight-errant to engage in it; and he was all the more
confirmed in this notion, by the idea that an image draped in black
they had with them was some illustrious lady that these villains and
discourteous thieves were carrying off by force. As soon as this
occurred to him he ran with all speed to Rocinante who was grazing at
large, and taking the bridle and the buckler from the saddle-bow, he
had him bridled in an instant, and calling to Sancho for his sword he
mounted Rocinante, braced his buckler on his arm, put his lance in
rest, and making a considerable circuit of the plain came back at a
half-gallop exclaiming: "Whoever shall say that I have been enchanted
with just cause, provided my lady the Princess Micomicona grants me
permission to do so, I give him the lie, challenge him and defy him to
single combat." The newly arrived travellers were amazed at the words
of Don Quixote; but the landlord removed their surprise by telling
them who he was, and not to mind him as he was out of his senses. They
then asked the landlord if by any chance a youth of about fifteen
years of age, from whom the cries came. Nor were they without cause,
for a lusty farmer was flogging him with a belt and following up every
blow with scoldings and commands, repeating, "Your mouth shut and your
eyes open!" while the youth made answer, "I won't do it again, master
mine; by God's passion I won't do it again, and I'll take more care of
the flock another time." Seeing what was going on, Don Quixote said in
an angry voice, "Discourteous knight, it ill becomes you to assail one
who cannot defend himself; mount your steed and take your lance" (for
there was a lance leaning against the oak to which the mare was tied),
"and I will make you know that you are behaving as a coward." The
farmer, seeing before him this figure in full armour brandishing a
lance over his head, gave himself up for dead, and made answer meekly,
"Sir Knight, this youth that I am chastising is my servant, employed
by me to watch a flock of sheep that I have hard by, and he is so
careless that I lose one every day, and when I punish him for his
carelessness and knavery he says I do it out of niggardliness, to
escape paying him the wages I owe him, and before God, and on my soul,
he lies." "Lies before me, base clown!" said Don Quixote. "By the sun
that shines on us I have a mind to run you through with this lance.
Pay him at once without another word; if not, by the God that rules us
I will make an end of you, and annihilate you on the spot; release him
instantly." The farmer hung his head, and without a word untied his
servant, of whom Don Quixote asked how much his master owed him. He
replied, nine months at seven reals a month. Don Quixote added it up,
found that it came to sixty-three reals, and told the farmer to pay it
down immediately, if he did not want to die for it. The trembling
clown replied that as he lived and by the oath he had sworn (though he
had not sworn any) it was not so much; for there were to be taken into
account and deducted three pairs of shoes he had given him, and a real
for two blood-lettings when he was sick. "All that is very well," said
Don Quixote; "but let the shoes and the blood-lettings stand as a
setoff against the blows you have given him without any cause; for if
he spoiled the leather of the shoes you paid for, you have damaged
that of his body, and if the barber took blood from him when he was
sick, you have drawn it when he was sound; so on that score he owes
you nothing." "The difficulty is, Sir Knight, that I have no money
here; let Andres come home with me, and I will pay him all, real by
real." "I go with him!" said the youth. "Nay, God forbid! No, senor,
not for the world; for once alone with me, he would ray me like a
Saint Bartholomew." "He will do nothing of the kind," said Don
Quixote; "I have only to command, and he will obey me; and as he has
sworn to me by the order of knighthood which he has received, I leave
him free, and I guarantee the payment." "Consider what you are saying,
senor," said the youth; "this master of mine is not a knight, nor has
he received any order of knighthood; for he is Juan Haldudo the Rich,
of Quintanar." "That matters little," replied Don Quixote; "there may
be Haldudos knights; moreover, everyone is the son of his works."
"That is true," said Andres; "but this master of mine--of what works
is he the son, when he refuses me the wages of my sweat and labour?"
"I do not refuse, brother Andres," said the farmer, "be good enough to
come along with me, and I swear by all the orders of knighthood there
are in the world to pay you as I have agreed, real by real, and
perfumed." "For the perfumery I excuse you," said Don Quixote; "give
it to him in reals, and I shall be satisfied; and see that you do as
you have sworn; if not, by the same oath I swear to come back and hunt
you out and punish you; and I shall find you though you should lie
closer than a lizard. And if you desire to know who it is lays this
command upon you, that you be more firmly bound to obey it, know that
I am the valorous Don Quixote of La Mancha, the undoer of injustice,
the righter of wrongs, the protector of damsels, the terror of giants,
and the winner of battles?" "That," said the goatherd, "sounds like
what one reads in the books of the knights-errant, who did all that
you say this man does; though it is my belief that either you are
joking, or else this gentleman has empty lodgings in his head." "You
are a great scoundrel," said Don Quixote, "and it is you who are empty
and a fool. I am fuller than ever was the whoreson bitch that bore
you;" and passing from words to deeds, he caught up a loaf that was
near him and sent it full in the goatherd's face, with such force that
he flattened his nose; but the goatherd, who did not understand jokes,
and found himself roughly handled in such good earnest, paying no
respect to carpet, tablecloth, or diners, sprang upon Don Quixote, and
seizing him by the throat with both hands would no doubt have
throttled him, had not Sancho Panza that instant come to the rescue,
and grasping him by the shoulders flung him down on the table,
smashing plates, breaking glasses, and upsetting and scattering
everything on it. Don Quixote, finding himself free, strove to get on
top of the goatherd, who, with his face covered with blood, and
soundly kicked by Sancho, was on all fours feeling about for one of
the table-knives to take a bloody revenge with. The canon and the
curate, however, prevented him, but the barber so contrived it that he
got Don Quixote under him, and rained down upon him such a shower of
fisticuffs that the poor knight's face streamed with blood as freely
as his own. The canon and the curate were bursting with laughter, the
officers were capering with delight, and both the one and the other
hissed them on as they do dogs that are worrying one another in a
fight. Sancho alone was frantic, for he could not free himself from
the grasp of one of the canon's servants, who kept him from going to
his master's assistance. At last, while they were all, with the
exception of the two bruisers who were mauling each other, in high
glee and enjoyment, they heard a trumpet sound a note so doleful that
it made them all look in the direction whence the sound seemed to
come. But the one that was most excited by hearing it was Don Quixote,
who though sorely against his will he was under the goatherd, and
something more than pretty well pummelled, said to him, "Brother devil
(for it is impossible but that thou must be one since thou hast had
might and strength enough to overcome mine), I ask thee to agree to a
truce for but one hour for the solemn note of yonder trumpet that
falls on our ears seems to me to summon me to some new adventure." The
goatherd, who was by this time tired of pummelling and being
pummelled, released him at once, and Don Quixote rising to his feet
and turning his eyes to the quarter where the sound had been heard,
suddenly saw coming down the slope of a hill several men clad in white
like penitents. The fact was that the clouds had that year withheld
their moisture from the earth, and in all the villages of the district
they were organising processions, rogations, and penances, imploring
God to open the hands of his mercy and send the rain; and to this end
the people of a village that was hard by were going in procession to a
holy hermitage there was on one side of that valley. Don Quixote when
he saw the strange garb of the penitents, without reflecting how often
he had seen it before, took it into his head that this was a case of
adventure, and that it fell to him alone as a knight-errant to engage
in it; and he was all the more confirmed in this notion, by the idea
that an image draped in black they had with them was some illustrious
lady that these villains and discourteous thieves were carrying off by
force. As soon as this occurred to him he ran with all speed to
Rocinante who was grazing at large, and taking the bridle and the
buckler from the saddle-bow, he had him bridled in an instant, and
calling to Sancho for his sword he mounted Rocinante, braced his
buckler on his arm, and drawing his sword, advanced to meet him; the
duke with boar-spear did the same; but the duchess would have gone in
front of them all had not the duke prevented her. Sancho alone,
deserting Dapple at the sight of the mighty beast, took to his heels
as hard as he could and strove in vain to mount a tall oak. As he was
clinging to a branch, however, half-way up in his struggle to reach
the top, the bough, such was his ill-luck and hard fate, gave way, and
caught in his fall by a broken limb of the oak, he hung suspended in
the air unable to reach the ground. Finding himself in this position,
and that the green coat was beginning to tear, and reflecting that if
the fierce animal came that way he might be able to get at him, he
began to utter such cries, and call for help so earnestly, that all
who heard him and did not see him felt sure he must be in the teeth of
some wild beast. In the end the tusked boar fell pierced by the blades
of the many spears they held in front of him; and Don Quixote, turning
round at the cries of Sancho, for he knew by them that it was he, saw
him hanging from the oak head downwards, with Dapple, who did not
forsake him in his distress, close beside him; and Cide Hamete
observes that he seldom saw Sancho Panza without seeing Dapple, or
Dapple without seeing Sancho Panza; such was their attachment and
loyalty one to the other. Don Quixote went over and unhooked Sancho,
who, as soon as he found himself on the ground, looked at the rent in
his huntingcoat and was grieved to the heart, for he thought he had
got a patrimonial estate in that suit. Meanwhile they had slung the
mighty boar across the back of a mule, and having covered it with
sprigs of rosemary and branches of myrtle, they bore it away as the
spoils of victory to some large field-tents which had been pitched in
the middle of the wood, where they found the tables laid and dinner
served, in such grand and sumptuous style that it was easy to see the
rank and magnificence of those who had provided it. Sancho, as he
showed the rents in his torn suit to the duchess, observed, "If we had
been hunting hares, or after small birds, my coat would have been safe
from being in the plight it's in; I don't know what pleasure one can
find in lying in wait for an animal that may take your life with his
tusk if he gets at you. I recollect having heard an old ballad sung
that says, By bears be thou devoured, as erst Was famous Favila."
"That," said Don Quixote, "was a Gothic king, who, going a-hunting,
was devoured by a bear." "Just so," said Sancho; "and I would not have
kings and princes expose themselves to such dangers for the sake of a
pleasure which, to my mind, ought not to be one, as it consists in
killing an animal that has done no harm whatever." "Quite the
contrary, Sancho; you are wrong there," said the duke; "for hunting is
more suitable and requisite for kings and princes than for anybody
else. The chase is the emblem of war; it has stratagems, wiles, and
crafty devices for overcoming the enemy in safety; in it extreme cold
and intolerable heat have to be borne, indolence and sleep are
despised, the bodily powers are invigorated, the limbs of him who
engages in it are made supple, and, in a word, it is a pursuit which
may be followed without injury to anyone and with enjoyment to many;
and the best of it is, it is not for everybody, as field-sports of
other sorts are, except hawking, which also is only for kings and
great lords. Reconsider your opinion therefore, Sancho, and when you
are governor take to hunting, and you will find the good of it."
"Nay," said Sancho, "the good governor should have a broken leg and
keep at home;" it would be a nice thing if, after people had been at
the trouble of coming to look for him on business, the governor were
to be away in the forest enjoying himself; the government would go on
badly in that fashion. By my faith, senor, hunting and amusements are
more fit for idlers than for governors; what I intend to amuse myself
with is playing all fours at Eastertime, and bowls on Sundays and
holidays; for these huntings don't suit my condition or agree with my
conscience." "God grant it may turn out so," said the duke; "because
it's a long step from saying to doing." "Be that as it may," said
Sancho, "'pledges don't distress a good payer,' and 'he whom God helps
does better than he who gets up early,' and 'it's the tripes that
carry the feet and not the feet the tripes;' I mean to say that if God
gives me help and I do my duty honestly, no doubt I'll govern better
than a gerfalcon. Nay, let them only put a finger in my mouth, and
they'll see whether I can bite or not." "The curse of God and all his
saints upon thee, thou accursed Sancho!" exclaimed Don Quixote; "when
will the day come--as I have often said to thee--when I shall hear
thee make one single coherent, rational remark without proverbs? Pray,
your highnesses, leave this fool alone, for he will grind your souls
between, not to say two, but two thousand proverbs, dragged in as much
in season, and as much to the purpose as--may God grant as much health
to him, or to me if I want to listen to them!" "Sancho Panza's
proverbs," said the duchess, "though more in number than the Greek
Commander's, are not therefore less to be esteemed for the conciseness
of the maxims. For my own part, I can say they give me more pleasure
than others that may be better brought in and more seasonably
introduced." In pleasant conversation of this sort they passed out of
the tent into the wood, and the day was spent in visiting some of the
posts and hiding-places, and then night closed in, not, however, as
brilliantly or tranquilly as might have been expected at the season,
for it was then midsummer; but bringing with it a kind of haze that
greatly aided the project of the duke and duchess; and thus, as night
began to fall, and a little after twilight set in, suddenly the whole
wood on all four sides seemed to be on fire, and shortly after, here,
there, on all sides, a vast number of trumpets and other military
instruments were heard, as if several troops of cavalry were passing
through the wood. The blaze of the fire and the noise of the warlike
instruments almost blinded the eyes and deafened the ears of those
that stood by, and indeed of all who were in the wood. Then there were
heard repeated lelilies after the fashion of the Moors when they rush
to battle; trumpets and clarions brayed, drums beat, fifes played, so
unceasingly and so fast that he could not have had any senses who did
not lose them with the confused din of so many instruments. The duke
was astounded, the duchess amazed, Don Quixote wondering, Sancho Panza
trembling, and indeed, even they who were aware of the cause were
frightened. In their fear, silence fell upon them, and a postillion,
in the guise of a demon, passed in front of them, blowing, in lieu of
a bugle, a huge hollow horn that gave out a horrible hoarse note. "Ho
there! brother courier," cried the duke, "who are you? Where are you
going? What troops are these that seem to be passing through the
wood?" To which the courier replied in a harsh, discordant voice, "I
am the devil; I am in search of Don Quixote of La Mancha; those who
are coming this way are six troops of enchanters, who are bringing on
a triumphal car the peerless Dulcinea del Toboso; she comes under
enchantment, together with the gallant Frenchman Montesinos, to give
instructions to Don Quixote as to how, she the said lady, may be
disenchanted." "If you were the devil, as you say and as your
appearance indicates," said the duke, "you would have known the said
knight Don Quixote of La Mancha, for you have him here before you."
"By God and upon my conscience," said the devil, "I never observed it,
for my mind is occupied with so many different things that I was
forgetting the main thing I came about." "This demon must be an honest
fellow and a good Christian," said Sancho; "for if he wasn't he
wouldn't swear by God and his conscience; I feel sure now there must
be good souls even in hell itself." Without dismounting, the demon
then turned to Don Quixote and said, "The unfortunate but valiant
knight Montesinos sends me to thee, the Knight of the Lions (would
that I saw thee in their claws), bidding me tell thee to wait for him
wherever I may find thee, as he brings with him her whom they call
Dulcinea del Toboso, that he may show thee what is needful in order to
disenchant her; and as I came for no more I need stay no longer;
demons of my sort be with thee, and good angels with these gentles;"
and so saying he blew his huge horn, turned about and went off without
waiting for a reply from anyone. They all felt fresh wonder, but
particularly Sancho and Don Quixote; Sancho to see how, in defiance of
the truth, they would have it that Dulcinea was enchanted; Don Quixote
because he could not feel sure whether what had happened to him in the
cave of Montesinos was true or not; and as he was deep in these
cogitations the duke said to him, "Do you mean to wait, Senor Don
Quixote?" "Why not?" replied he; "here will I wait, fearless and firm,
though all hell should come to attack me." "Well then, if I see
another devil or hear another horn like the last, I'll wait here as
much as in Flanders," said Sancho. Night now closed in more
completely, and many lights began to flit through the wood, just as
those fiery exhalations from the earth, that look like shooting-stars
to our eyes, flit through the heavens; a frightful noise, too, was
heard, like that made by the solid wheels the ox-carts usually have,
by the harsh, ceaseless creaking of which, they say, the bears and
wolves are put to flight, if there happen to be any where they are
passing. In addition to all this commotion, there came a further
disturbance to increase the tumult, for now it seemed as if in truth,
on all four sides of the wood, four encounters or battles were going
on at the same time; in one quarter resounded the dull noise of a
terrible cannonade, in another numberless muskets were being
discharged, the shouts of the combatants sounded almost close at hand,
and farther away the Moorish lelilies were raised again and again. In
a word, the bugles, the horns, the clarions, the trumpets, the drums,
the cannon, the musketry, and above all the tremendous noise of the
carts, all made up together a din so confused and terrific that Don
Quixote had need to summon up all his courage to brave it; but
Sancho's gave way, and he fell fainting on the skirt of the duchess's
robe, who let him lie there and promptly bade them throw water in his
face. This was done, and he came to himself by the time that one of
the carts with the creaking wheels reached the spot. It was drawn by
four plodding oxen all covered with black housings; on each horn they
had fixed a large lighted wax taper, and on the top of the cart was
constructed a raised seat, on which sat a venerable old man with a
beard whiter than the very snow, and so long that it fell below his
waist; he was dressed in a long robe of black buckram; for as the cart
was thickly set with a multitude of candles it was easy to make out
everything that was on it. Leading it were two hideous demons, also
clad in buckram, with countenances so frightful that Sancho, having
once seen them, shut his eyes so as not to see them again. As soon as
the cart came opposite the spot the old man rose from his lofty seat,
and standing up said in a loud voice, "I am the sage Lirgandeo," and
without another word the cart then passed on. Behind it came another
of the same form, with another aged man enthroned, who, stopping the
cart, said in a voice no less solemn than that of the first, "I am the
sage Alquife, the great friend of Urganda the Unknown," and passed on.
Then another cart came by at the same pace, but the occupant of the
throne was not old like the others, but a man stalwart and robust, and
of a forbidding countenance, who as he came up said in a voice far
hoarser and more devilish, "I am the enchanter Archelaus, the mortal
enemy of Amadis of Gaul and all his kindred," and then passed on.
Having gone a short distance the three carts halted and the monotonous
noise of their wheels ceased, and soon after they heard another, not
noise, but sound of sweet, harmonious music, of which Sancho was very
glad, taking it to be a good sign; and said he to the duchess, from
whom he did not stir a step, or for a single instant, "Senora, where
there's music there can't be mischief." "Nor where there are lights
and it is bright," said the duchess; to which Sancho replied, "Fire
gives light, and it's bright where there are bonfires, as we see by
those that are all round us and perhaps may burn us; but music is a
sign of mirth and merrymaking." "That remains to be seen," said Don
Quixote, who was listening to all that passed; and he was right, as is
shown in the following chapter. CHAPTER XXXV. WHEREIN IS CONTINUED THE
INSTRUCTION GIVEN TO DON QUIXOTE TOUCHING THE DISENCHANTMENT OF
DULCINEA, TOGETHER WITH OTHER MARVELLOUS INCIDENTS They saw advancing
towards them, to the sound of this pleasing music, what they call a
triumphal car, drawn by six grey mules with white linen housings, on
each of which was mounted a penitent, robed also in white, with a
large lighted wax taper in his hand. The car was twice or, perhaps,
three times as large as the former ones, and in front and on the sides
stood twelve more penitents, all as white as snow and all with lighted
tapers, a spectacle to excite fear as well as wonder; and on a raised
throne was seated a nymph draped in a multitude of silver-tissue veils
with an embroidery of countless gold spangles glittering all over
them, that made her appear, if not richly, at least brilliantly,
apparelled. She had her face covered with thin transparent sendal, the
texture of which did not prevent the fair features of a maiden from
being distinguished, while the numerous lights made it possible to
judge of her beauty and of her years, which seemed to be not less than
seventeen but not to have yet reached twenty. Beside her was a figure
in a robe of state, as they call it, reaching to the feet, while the
head was covered with a black veil. But the instant the car was
opposite the duke and duchess and Don Quixote remained at table
discussing a great variety of things, but all bearing on the calling
of arms and knight-errantry. The duchess begged Don Quixote, as he
seemed to have a retentive memory, to describe and portray to her the
beauty and features of the lady Dulcinea del Toboso, for, judging by
what fame trumpeted abroad of her beauty, she felt sure she must be
the fairest creature in the world, nay, in all La Mancha. Don Quixote
sighed on hearing the duchess's request, and said, "If I could pluck
out my heart, and lay it on a plate on this table here before your
highness's eyes, it would spare my tongue the pain of telling what can
hardly be thought of, for in it your excellence would see her
portrayed in full. But why should I attempt to depict and describe in
detail, and feature by feature, the beauty of the peerless Dulcinea,
the burden being one worthy of other shoulders than mine, an
enterprise wherein the pencils of Parrhasius, Timantes, and Apelles,
and the graver of Lysippus ought to be employed, to paint it in
pictures and carve it in marble and bronze, and Ciceronian and
Demosthenian eloquence to sound its praises?" "What does Demosthenian
mean, Senor Don Quixote?" said the duchess; "it is a word I never
heard in all my life." "Demosthenian eloquence," said Don Quixote,
"means the eloquence of Demosthenes, as Ciceronian means that of
Cicero, who were the two most eloquent orators in the world." "True,"
said the duke; "you must have lost your wits to ask such a question.
Nevertheless, Senor Don Quixote would greatly gratify us if he would
depict her to us; for never fear, even in an outline or sketch she
will be something to make the fairest envious." "I would do so
certainly," said Don Quixote, "had she not been blurred to my mind's
eye by the misfortune that fell upon her a short time since, one of
such a nature that I am more ready to weep over it than to describe
it. For your highnesses must know that, going a few days back to kiss
her hands and receive her benediction, approbation, and permission for
this third sally, I found her altogether a different being from the
one I sought; I found her enchanted and changed from a princess into a
peasant, from fair to foul, from an angel into a devil, from fragrant
to pestiferous, from refined to clownish, from a dignified lady into a
jumping tomboy, and, in a word, from Dulcinea del Toboso into a coarse
Sayago wench." "God bless me!" said the duke aloud at this, "who can
have done the world such an injury? Who can have robbed it of the
beauty that gladdened it, of the grace and gaiety that charmed it, of
the modesty that shed a lustre upon it?" "Who?" replied Don Quixote;
"who could it be but some malignant enchanter of the many that
persecute me out of envy--that accursed race born into the world to
obscure and bring to naught the achievements of the good, and glorify
and exalt the deeds of the wicked? Enchanters have persecuted me,
enchanters persecute me still, and enchanters will continue to
persecute me until they have sunk me and my lofty chivalry in the deep
abyss of oblivion; and they injure and wound me where they know I feel
it most. For to deprive a knight-errant of his lady is to deprive him
of the eyes he sees with, of the sun that gives him light, of the food
whereby he lives. Many a time before have I said it, and I say it now
once more, a knight-errant without a lady is like a tree without
leaves, a building without a foundation, or a shadow without the body
that causes it." "There is no denying it," said the duchess; "but
still, if we are to believe the history of Don Quixote that has come
out here lately with general applause, it is to be inferred from it,
if I mistake not, that you never saw the lady Dulcinea, and that the
said lady is nothing in the world but an imaginary lady, one that you
yourself begot and gave birth to in your brain, and adorned with
whatever charms and perfections you chose." "There is a good deal to
be said on that point," said Sancho; "let us both go to sleep now, and
after that, God has decreed what will happen. Let me tell your worship
that for a man to whip himself in cold blood is a hard thing,
especially if the stripes fall upon an ill-nourished and worse-fed
body. Let my lady Dulcinea have patience, and when she is least
expecting it, she will see me made a riddle of with whipping, and
'until death it's all life;' I mean that I have still life in me, and
the desire to make good what I have promised." Don Quixote thanked
him, and ate a little, and Sancho a good deal, and then they both lay
down to sleep, leaving those two inseparable friends and comrades,
Rocinante and Dapple, to their own devices and to feed unrestrained
upon the abundant grass with which the meadow was furnished. They woke
up rather late, mounted once more and resumed their journey, pushing
on to reach an inn which was in sight, apparently a league off. I say
an inn, because Don Quixote called it so, contrary to his usual
practice of calling all inns castles. They reached it, and asked the
landlord if they could put up there. He said yes, with as much comfort
and as good fare as they could find in Saragossa. They dismounted, and
Sancho stowed away his larder in a room of which the landlord gave him
the key. He took the beasts to the stable, fed them, and came back to
see what orders Don Quixote, who was seated on a bench at the door,
had for him, giving special thanks to heaven that this inn had not
been taken for a castle by his master. Supper-time came, and they
repaired to their room, and Sancho asked the landlord what he had to
give them for supper. To this the landlord replied that his mouth
should be the measure; he had only to ask what he would; for that inn
was provided with the birds of the air and the fowls of the earth and
the fish of the sea. "There's no need of all that," said Sancho; "if
they'll roast us a couple of chickens we'll be satisfied, for my
master is delicate and eats little, and I'm not over and above
gluttonous." The landlord replied he had no chickens, for the kites
had stolen them. "Well then," said Sancho, "let senor landlord tell
them to roast a pullet, so that it is a tender one." "Pullet! My
father!" said the landlord; "indeed and in truth it's only yesterday I
sent over fifty to the city to sell; but saving pullets ask what you
will." "In that case," said Sancho, "you will not be without veal or
kid." "Just now," said the landlord, "there's none in the house, for
it's all finished; but next week there will be enough and to spare."
"Much good that does us," said Sancho; "I'll lay a bet that all these
short-comings are going to wind up in plenty of bacon and eggs." "By
God," said the landlord, "my guest's wits must be precious dull; I
tell him I have neither pullets nor hens, and he wants me to have
eggs! Talk of other dainties, if you please, and don't ask for hens
again." "Body o' me!" said Sancho, "let's settle the matter; say at
once what you have got, and let us have no more words about it." "In
truth and earnest, senor guest," said the landlord, "all I have is a
couple of cow-heels like calves' feet, or a couple of calves' feet
like cowheels; they are boiled with chick-peas, onions, and bacon, and
at this moment they are crying 'Come eat me, come eat me." "I mark
them for mine on the spot," said Sancho; "let nobody touch them; I'll
pay better for them than anyone else, for I could not wish for
anything more to my taste; and I don't care a pin whether they are
feet or heels." "Nobody shall touch them," said the landlord; "for the
other guests I have, being persons of high quality, bring their own
cook and caterer and larder with them." "If you come to people of
quality," said Sancho, "there's nobody more so than my master; but the
calling he follows does not allow of larders or store-rooms; we lay
ourselves down in the middle of a meadow, and fill ourselves with
acorns or medlars." Here ended Sancho's conversation with the
landlord, Sancho not caring to carry it any farther by answering him;
for he had already asked him what calling or what profession it was
his master was of. Supper-time having come, then, Don Quixote betook
himself to his room, the landlord brought in the stew-pan just as it
was, and he sat himself down to sup very resolutely. It seems that in
another room, which was next to Don Quixote's, with nothing but a thin
partition to separate it, he overheard these words, "As you live,
Senor Don Jeronimo, while they are bringing supper, let us read
another chapter of the Second Part of 'Don Quixote of La Mancha.'" The
instant Don Quixote heard his own name be started to his feet and
listened with open ears to catch what they said about him, and heard
the Don Jeronimo who had been addressed say in reply, "Why would you
have us read that absurd stuff, Don Juan, when it is impossible for
anyone who has read the First Part of the history of 'Don Quixote of
La Mancha' to take any pleasure in reading this Second Part?" "For all
that," said he who was addressed as Don Juan, "we shall do well to
read it, for there is no book so bad but it has something good in it,"
said the bachelor. "No doubt of that," replied Don Quixote; "but it
often happens that those who have acquired and attained a
well-deserved reputation by their writings, lose it entirely, or
damage it in some degree, when they give them to the press." "The
reason of that," said Samson, "is, that as printed works are examined
leisurely, their faults are easily seen; and the greater the fame of
the writer, the more closely are they scrutinised. Men famous for
their genius, great poets, illustrious historians, are always, or most
commonly, envied by those who take a particular delight and pleasure
in criticising the writings of others, without having produced any of
their own." "That is no wonder," said Don Quixote; "for there are many
divines who are no good for the pulpit, but excellent in detecting the
defects or excesses of those who preach." "All that is true, Senor Don
Quixote," said Carrasco; "but I wish such fault-finders were more
lenient and less exacting, and did not pay so much attention to the
spots on the bright sun of the work they grumble at; for if aliquando
bonus dormitat Homerus, they should remember how long he remained
awake to shed the light of his work with as little shade as possible;
and perhaps it may be that what they find fault with may be moles,
that sometimes heighten the beauty of the face that bears them; and so
I say very great is the risk to which he who prints a book exposes
himself, for of all impossibilities the greatest is to write one that
will satisfy and please all readers." "That which treats of me must
have pleased few," said Don Quixote. "Quite the contrary," said the
bachelor; "for, as stultorum infinitum est numerus, innumerable are
those who have relished the said history; but some have brought a
charge against the author's memory, inasmuch as he forgot to say who
the thief was who stole Sancho's Dapple; for it is not stated there,
but only to be inferred from what is set down, that he was stolen, and
a little farther on we see Sancho mounted on the same ass, without any
reappearance of it. They say, too, that he forgot to state what Sancho
did with those hundred crowns that he found in the valise in the
Sierra Morena, as he never alludes to them again, and there are many
who would be glad to know what he did with them, or what he spent them
on, for it is one of the serious omissions of the work." "Senor
Samson, I am not in a humour now for going into accounts or
explanations," said Sancho; "for there's a sinking of the stomach come
over me, and unless I doctor it with a couple of sups of the old stuff
it will put me on the thorn of Santa Lucia. I have it at home, and my
old woman is waiting for me; after dinner I'll come back, and will
answer you and all the world every question you may choose to ask, as
well about the loss of the ass as about the spending of the hundred
crowns;" and without another word or waiting for a reply he made off
home. Don Quixote begged and entreated the bachelor to stay and do
penance with him. The bachelor accepted the invitation and remained, a
couple of young pigeons were added to the ordinary fare, at dinner
they talked chivalry, Carrasco fell in with his host's humour, the
banquet came to an end, they took their afternoon sleep, Sancho
returned, and their conversation was resumed. CHAPTER IV. IN WHICH
SANCHO PANZA GIVES A SATISFACTORY REPLY TO THE DOUBTS AND QUESTIONS OF
THE BACHELOR SAMSON CARRASCO, TOGETHER WITH OTHER MATTERS WORTH
KNOWING AND TELLING Sancho came back to Don Quixote's house, and
returning to the late subject of conversation, he said, "As to what
Senor Samson said, that he would like to know by whom, or how, or when
my ass was stolen, I say in reply that the same night we went into the
Sierra Morena, flying from the Holy Brotherhood after that unlucky
adventure of the galley slaves, and the other of the corpse that was
going to Segovia, my master and I ensconced ourselves in a thicket,
and there, my master leaning on his lance, and I seated on my Dapple,
battered and weary with the late frays we fell asleep as if it had
been on four feather mattresses; and I in particular slept so sound,
that, whoever he was, he was able to come and prop me up on four
stakes, which he put under the four corners of the pack-saddle in such
a way that he was unable to free it, and was left hanging by it with
his face and breast on the ground. Don Quixote, who was not used to
dismount without having the stirrup held, fancying that Sancho had by
this time come to hold it for him, threw himself off with a lurch and
brought Rocinante's saddle after him, which was no doubt badly
girthed, and saddle and he both came to the ground; not without
discomfiture to him and abundant curses muttered between his teeth
against the unlucky Sancho, who had his foot still in the shackles.
The duke ordered his huntsmen to go to the help of knight and squire,
and they raised Don Quixote, sorely shaken by his fall; and he,
limping, advanced as best he could to kneel before the noble pair.
This, however, the duke would by no means permit; on the contrary,
dismounting from his horse, he went and embraced Don Quixote, saying,
"I am grieved, Sir Knight of the Rueful Countenance, that your first
experience on my ground should have been such an unfortunate one as we
have seen; but the carelessness of squires is often the cause of worse
accidents." "That which has happened me in meeting you, mighty
prince," replied Don Quixote, "cannot be unfortunate, even if my fall
had not stopped short of the depths of the bottomless pit, for the
glory of having seen you would have lifted me up and delivered me from
it. My squire, God's curse upon him, is better at unloosing his tongue
in talking impertinence than in tightening the girths of a saddle to
keep it steady; but however I may be, allen or raised up, on foot or
on horseback, I shall always be at your service and that of my lady
the duchess, your worthy consort, worthy queen of beauty and paramount
princess of courtesy." "Gently, Senor Don Quixote of La Mancha," said
the duke; "where my lady Dona Dulcinea del Toboso is, it is not right
that other beauties should be praised." Sancho, by this time released
from his entanglement, was standing by, and before his master could
answer he said, "There is no denying, and it must be maintained, that
my lady Dulcinea del Toboso is very beautiful; but the hare jumps up
where one least expects it; and I have heard say that what we call
nature is like a potter that makes vessels of clay, and he who makes
one fair vessel can as well make two, or three, or a hundred; I say so
because, by my faith, my lady the duchess is in no way behind my
mistress the lady Dulcinea del Toboso." Don Quixote turned to the
duchess and said, "Your highness may conceive that never had
knight-errant in this world a more talkative or a droller squire than
I have, and he will prove the truth of what I say, look at me, printed
in histories, famed in arms, courteous in behaviour, honoured by
princes, courted by maidens; and after all, when I looked forward to
palms, triumphs, and crowns, won and earned by my valiant deeds, I
have this morning seen myself trampled on, kicked, and crushed by the
feet of unclean and filthy animals. This thought blunts my teeth,
paralyses my jaws, cramps my hands, and robs me of all appetite for
food; so much so that I have a mind to let myself die of hunger, the
cruelest death of all deaths." "So then," said Sancho, munching hard
all the time, "your worship does not agree with the proverb that says,
'Let Martha die, but let her die with a full belly.' I, at any rate,
have no mind to kill myself; so far from that, I mean to do as the
cobbler does, who stretches the leather with his teeth until he makes
it reach as far as he wants. I'll stretch out my life by eating until
it reaches the end heaven has fixed for it; and let me tell you,
senor, there's no greater folly than to think of dying of despair as
your worship does; take my advice, and after eating lie down and sleep
a bit on this green grass-mattress, and you will see that when you
awake you'll feel something better." Don Quixote did as he
recommended, for it struck him that Sancho's reasoning was more like a
philosopher's than a blockhead's, and said he, "Sancho, if thou wilt
do for me what I am going to tell thee my ease of mind would be more
assured and my heaviness of heart not so great; and it is this; to go
aside a little while I am sleeping in accordance with thy advice, and,
making bare thy carcase to the air, to give thyself three or four
hundred lashes with Rocinante's reins, on account of the three
thousand and odd thou art to give thyself for the disenchantment of
Dulcinea; for it is a great pity that the poor lady should be left
enchanted through thy carelessness and negligence." "There is a good
deal to be said on that point," said Sancho. And now a tipstaff came
up with a young man in his grasp, and said, "Senor governor, this
youth was coming towards us, and as soon as he saw the officers of
justice he turned about and ran like a deer, a sure proof that he must
be some evil-doer; I ran after him, and had it not been that he
stumbled and fell, I should never have caught him." "What did you run
for, fellow?" said Sancho. To which the young man replied, "Senor, it
was to avoid answering all the questions officers of justice put."
"What are you by trade?" "A weaver." "And what do you weave?" "Lance
heads, with your worship's good leave." "You're facetious with me! You
plume yourself on being a wag? Very good; and where were you going
just now?" "To take the air, senor." "And where does one take the air
in this island?" "Where it blows." "Good! your answers are very much
to the point; you are a smart youth; but take notice that I am the
air, and that I blow upon you a-stern, and send you to gaol. Ho there!
lay hold of him and take him off; I'll make him sleep there to-night
without air." "By God," said the young man, "your worship will make me
sleep in gaol just as soon as make me king." "Why shan't I make thee
sleep in gaol?" said Sancho. "Have I not the power to arrest thee and
release thee whenever I like?" "All the power your worship has," said
the young man, "won't be able to make me sleep in gaol." "How? not
able!" said Sancho; "take him away at once where he'll see his mistake
with his own eyes, even if the gaoler is willing to exert his
interested generosity on his behalf; for I'll lay a penalty of two
thousand ducats on him if he allows him to stir a step from the
prison." "That's ridiculous," said the young man; "the fact is, all
the men on earth will not make me sleep in prison." "Tell me, you
devil," said Sancho, "have you got any angel that will deliver you,
and take off the irons I am going to order them to put upon you?"
"Now, senor governor," said the young man in a sprightly manner, "let
us be reasonable and come to the point. Granted your worship may order
me to be taken to prison, and to have irons and chains put on me, and
to be shut up in a cell, and may lay heavy penalties on the gaoler if
he lets me out, and that he obeys your orders; still, if I don't
choose to sleep, and choose to remain awake all night without closing
an eye, will your worship with all your power be able to make me sleep
if I don't choose?" "No, truly," said the secretary, "and the fellow
has made his point." "So then," said Sancho, "it would be entirely of
your own choice you would keep from sleeping; not in opposition to my
will?" "No, senor," said the youth, "certainly not." "Well then, go,
and God be with you," said Sancho; "be off home to sleep, and God give
you sound sleep, for I don't want to rob you of it; but for the
future, let me advise you don't joke with the authorities, because you
may come across some one who will bring down the joke on your own
skull." The young man went his way, and the governor continued his
round, and shortly afterwards two tipstaffs came up with a man in
custody, and said, "Senor governor, this person, who seems to be a
man, is not so, but a woman, and not an ill-favoured one, in man's
clothes." They raised two or three lanterns to her face, and by their
light they distinguished the features of a woman to all appearance of
the age of sixteen or a little more, with her hair gathered into a
gold and green silk net, and fair as a thousand pearls. They scanned
her from head to foot, and observed that she had on red silk stockings
with garters of white taffety bordered with gold and pearl; her
breeches were of green and gold stuff, and under an open jacket or
jerkin of the same she wore a doublet of the finest white and gold
cloth; her shoes were white and such as men wear; she carried no sword
at her belt, but only a richly ornamented dagger, and on her fingers
she had several handsome rings. In short, the girl seemed fair to look
at in the eyes of all, and none of those who beheld her knew her, the
people of the town said they could not imagine who she was, and those
who were in the secret of the jokes that were to be practised upon
Sancho were the ones who were most surprised, for this incident or
discovery had not been arranged by them; and they watched anxiously to
see how the affair would end. Sancho was fascinated by the girl's
beauty, and he asked her who she was, where she was going, and what
had induced her to dress herself in that garb. She with her eyes fixed
on the ground answered in modest confusion, "I cannot tell you, senor,
before so many people what it is of such consequence to me to have
kept secret; one thing I wish to be known, that I am no thief or
evildoer, but only an unhappy maiden whom the power of jealousy has
led to break through the respect that is due to modesty." Hearing this
the majordomo said to Sancho, "Make the people stand back, senor
governor, that this lady may say what she wishes with less
embarrassment." Sancho gave the order, and all except the majordomo,
the head-carver, and the secretary fell back. Finding herself then in
the presence of no more, the damsel went on to say, "I am the
daughter, sirs, of Pedro Perez Mazorca, the wool-farmer of this town,
who is in the habit of coming very often to my father's house." "That
won't do, senora," said the majordomo; "for I know Pedro Perez very
well, and I know he has no child at all, either son or daughter; and
besides, though you say he is your father, you add then that he comes
very often to your father's house." "I had already noticed that," said
Sancho. "I am confused just now, sirs," said the damsel, "and I don't
know what I am saying; but the truth is that I am the daughter of
Diego de la Llana, whom you must all know." "Ay, that will do," said
the majordomo; "for I know Diego de la Llana, and know that he is a
gentleman of position and a rich man, and that he has a son and a
daughter, and that since he was left a widower nobody in all this town
can speak of having seen his daughter's face; for he keeps her so
closely shut up that he does not give even the sun a chance of seeing
her; and for all that report says she is extremely beautiful." "It is
true," said the damsel, "and I am that daughter; whether report lies
or not as to my beauty, you, sirs, will have decided by this time, as
you have seen me;" and with this she began to weep bitterly. On seeing
this the secretary leant over to the head-carver's ear, and said to
him in a low voice, 'What are you about, you sneak, don't you see that
I am here?' The alcalde like a polite man pulled up his horse and said
to him, 'Proceed, senor, for it is I, rather, who ought to accompany
my lady Dona Casilda'--for that was my mistress's name. Still my
husband, cap in hand, persisted in trying to accompany the alcalde,
and seeing this my lady, filled with rage and vexation, pulled out a
big pin, or, I rather think, a bodkin, out of her needle-case and
drove it into his back with such force that my husband gave a loud
yell, and writhing fell to the ground with his lady. Her two lacqueys
ran to rise her up, and the alcalde and the alguacils did the same;
the Guadalajara gate was all in commotion--I mean the idlers
congregated there; my mistress came back on foot, and my husband
hurried away to a barber's shop protesting that he was run right
through the guts. The courtesy of my husband was noised abroad to such
an extent, that the boys gave him no peace in the street; and on this
account, and because he was somewhat shortsighted, my lady dismissed
him; and it was chagrin at this I am convinced beyond a doubt that
brought on his death. I was left a helpless widow, with a daughter on
my hands growing up in beauty like the sea-foam; at length, however,
as I had the character of being an excellent needlewoman, my lady the
duchess, then lately married to my lord the duke, offered to take me
with her to this kingdom of Aragon, and my daughter also, and here as
time went by my daughter grew up and with her all the graces in the
world; she sings like a lark, dances quick as thought, foots it like a
gipsy, reads and writes like a schoolmaster, and does sums like a
miser; of her neatness I say nothing, for the running water is not
purer, and her age is now, if my memory serves me, sixteen years five
months and three days, one more or less. To come to the point, the son
of a very rich farmer, living in a village of my lord the duke's not
very far from here, fell in love with this girl of mine; and in short,
how I know not, they came together, and under the promise of marrying
her he made a fool of my daughter, and will not keep his word. And
though my lord the duke is aware of it (for I have complained to him,
not once but many and many a time, and entreated him to order the
farmer to marry my daughter), he turns a deaf ear and will scarcely
listen to me; the reason being that as the deceiver's father is so
rich, and lends him money, and is constantly going security for his
debts, he does not like to offend or annoy him in any way. Now, senor,
I want your worship to take it upon yourself to redress this wrong
either by entreaty or by arms; for by what all the world says you came
into it to redress grievances and right wrongs and help the
unfortunate. Let your worship put before you the unprotected condition
of my daughter, her youth, and all the perfections I have said she
possesses; and before God and on my conscience, out of all the damsels
my lady has, there is not one that comes up to the sole of her shoe,
and the one they call Altisidora, and look upon as the boldest and
gayest of them, put in comparison with my daughter, does not come
within two leagues of her. For I would have you know, senor, all is
not gold that glitters, and that same little Altisidora has more
forwardness than good looks, and more impudence than modesty; besides
being not very sound, for she has such a disagreeable breath that one
cannot bear to be near her for a moment; and even my lady the
duchess--but I'll hold my tongue, for they say that walls have ears."
"For heaven's sake, Dona Rodriguez, what ails my lady the duchess?"
asked Don Quixote. "Adjured in that way," replied the duenna, "I
cannot help answering the question and telling the whole truth. Senor
Don Quixote, have you observed the comeliness of my lady the duchess,
that smooth complexion of hers like a burnished polished sword, those
two cheeks of milk and carmine, that gay lively step with which she
treads or rather seems to spurn the earth, so that one would fancy she
went radiating health wherever she passed? Well then, let me tell you
she may thank, first of all God, for this, and next, two issues that
she has, one in each leg, by which all the evil humours, of which the
doctors say she is full, are discharged." "Blessed Virgin!" exclaimed
Don Quixote; "and is it possible that my lady the duchess has drains
of that sort? I would not have believed it if the barefoot friars had
told it me; but as the lady Dona Rodriguez says so, it must be so. But
surely such issues, and in such places, do not discharge humours, but
liquid amber. Verily, I do believe now that this practice of opening
issues is a very important matter for the health." Don Quixote had
hardly said this, when the chamber door flew open with a loud bang,
and with the start the noise gave her Dona Rodriguez let the candle
fall from her hand, and the room was left as dark as a wolf's mouth,
as the saying is. Suddenly the poor duenna felt two hands seize her by
the throat, so tightly that she could not croak, while some one else,
without uttering a word, very briskly hoisted up her petticoats, and
with what seemed to be a slipper began to lay on so heartily that
anyone would have felt pity for her; but although Don Quixote felt it
he never stirred from his bed, but lay quiet and silent, nay
apprehensive that his turn for a drubbing might be coming. Nor was the
apprehension an idle one; one; for leaving the duenna (who did not
dare to cry out) well basted, the silent executioners fell upon Don
Quixote, and stripping him of the sheet and the coverlet, they pinched
him so fast and so hard that he was driven to defend himself with his
fists, and all this in marvellous silence. The battle lasted nearly
half an hour, and then the phantoms fled; Dona Rodriguez gathered up
her skirts, and bemoaning her fate went out without saying a word to
Don Quixote, and he, sorely pinched, puzzled, and dejected, remained
alone, and there we will leave him, wondering who could have been the
perverse enchanter who had reduced him to such a state; but that shall
be told in due season, for Sancho claims our attention, and the
methodical arrangement of the story demands it. CHAPTER XLIX. OF WHAT
HAPPENED SANCHO IN MAKING THE ROUND OF HIS ISLAND CHAPTER L WHEREIN IS
SET FORTH WHO THE ENCHANTERS AND EXECUTIONERS WERE WHO FLOGGED THE
DUENNA AND PINCHED DON QUIXOTE, AND ALSO WHAT BEFELL THE PAGE WHO
CARRIED THE LETTER TO TERESA PANZA, SANCHO PANZA'S WIFE CHAPTER LI OF
THE PROGRESS OF SANCHO'S GOVERNMENT, AND OTHER SUCH ENTERTAINING
MATTERS CHAPTER LII WHEREIN IS RELATED THE ADVENTURE OF THE SECOND
DISTRESSED OR AFFLICTED DUENNA, OTHERWISE CALLED DONA RODRIGUEZ
CHAPTER LIII OF THE TROUBLOUS END AND TERMINATION SANCHO PANZA'S
GOVERNMENT CAME TO To fancy that in this life anything belonging to it
will remain for ever in the same state is an idle fancy; on the
contrary, in it everything seems to go in a circle, I mean round and
round. The spring succeeds the summer, the summer the fall, the fall
the autumn, the autumn the winter, and the winter the spring, and so
time rolls with never-ceasing wheel. Man's life alone, swifter than
time, speeds onward to its end without any hope of renewal, save it be
in that other life which is endless and boundless. Thus saith Cide
Hamete the Mahometan philosopher; for there are many that by the light
of nature alone, without the light of faith, have a comprehension of
the fleeting nature and instability of this present life and the
endless duration of that eternal life we hope for; but our author is
here speaking of the rapidity with which Sancho's government came to
an end, melted away, disappeared, vanished as it were in smoke and
shadow. For as he lay in bed on the night of the seventh day of his
government, sated, not with bread and wine, but with delivering
judgments and giving opinions and making laws and proclamations, just
as sleep, in spite of hunger, was beginning to close his eyelids, he
heard such a noise of bell-ringing and shouting that one would have
fancied the whole island was going to the bottom. He sat up in bed and
remained listening intently to try if he could make out what could be
the cause of so great an uproar; not only, however, was he unable to
discover what it was, but as countless drums and trumpets now helped
to swell the din of the bells and shouts, he was more puzzled than
ever, and filled with fear and terror; and getting up he put on a pair
of slippers because of the dampness of the floor, and without throwing
a dressing gown or anything of the kind over him he rushed out of the
door of his room, just in time to see approaching along a corridor a
band of more than twenty persons with lighted torches and naked swords
in their hands, all shouting out, "To arms, to arms, senor governor,
to arms! The enemy is in the island in countless numbers, and we are
lost unless your skill and valour come to our support." Keeping up
this noise, tumult, and uproar, they came to where Sancho stood dazed
and bewildered by what he saw and heard, and as they approached one of
them called out to him, "Arm at once, your lordship, if you would not
have yourself destroyed and the whole island lost." "What have I to do
with arming?" said Sancho. "What do I know about arms or supports?
Better leave all that to my master Don Quixote, who will settle it and
make all safe in a trice; for I, sinner that I am, God help me, don't
understand these scuffles." "Ah, senor governor," said another, "what
slackness of mettle this is! Arm yourself; here are arms for you,
offensive and defensive; come out to the plaza and be our leader and
captain; it falls upon you by right, for you are our governor." "Arm
me then, in God's name," said Sancho, and they at once produced two
large shields they had come provided with, and placed them upon him
over his shirt, without letting him put on anything else, one shield
in front and the other behind, and passing his arms through openings
they had made, they bound him tight with ropes, so that there he was
walled and boarded up as straight as a spindle and unable to bend his
knees or stir a single step. In his hand they placed a lance, on which
he leant to keep himself from falling, and as soon as they had him
thus fixed they bade him march forward and lead them on and give them
all courage; for with him for their guide and lamp and morning star,
they were sure to bring their business to a successful issue. "How am
I to march, unlucky being that I am?" said Sancho, "when I can't stir
my knee-caps, for these boards I have bound so tight to my body won't
let me. What you must do is carry me in your arms, and lay me across
or set me upright in some postern, and I'll hold it either with this
lance or with my body." "On, senor governor!" cried another, "it is
fear more than the boards that keeps you from moving; make haste, stir
yourself, for there is no time to lose; the enemy is increasing in
numbers, the shouts grow louder, and the danger is pressing." Urged by
these exhortations and reproaches the poor governor made an attempt to
advance, but fell to the ground with such a crash that he fancied he
had broken himself all to pieces. There he lay like a tortoise
enclosed in its shell, or a side of bacon between two
kneading-troughs, or a boat bottom up on the beach; nor did the gang
of jokers feel any compassion for him when they saw him down; so far
from that, extinguishing their torches they began to shout afresh and
to renew the calls to arms with such energy, trampling on poor Sancho,
and slashing at him over the shield with their swords in such a way
that, if he had not gathered himself together and made himself small
and drawn in his head between the shields, it would have fared badly
with the poor governor, as, squeezed into that narrow compass, he lay,
sweating and sweating again, and commending himself with all his heart
to his lady, imploring her support in that dread pass and enterprise,
and on the way commending himself to God, too, not to forget him.
Sancho who never quitted his side, stretched his neck as far as he
could and peered between the legs of Rocinante to see if he could now
discover what it was that caused him such fear and apprehension. They
went it might be a hundred paces farther, when on turning a corner the
true cause, beyond the possibility of any mistake, of that
dread-sounding and to them awe-inspiring noise that had kept them all
the night in such fear and perplexity, appeared plain and obvious; and
it was (if, reader, thou art not disgusted and disappointed) six
fulling hammers which by their alternate strokes made all the din.
When Don Quixote perceived what it was, he was struck dumb and rigid
from head to foot. Sancho glanced at him and saw him with his head
bent down upon his breast in manifest mortification; and Don Quixote
glanced at Sancho and saw him with his cheeks puffed out and his mouth
full of laughter, and evidently ready to explode with it, and in spite
of his vexation he could not help laughing at the sight of him; and
when Sancho saw his master begin he let go so heartily that he had to
hold his sides with both hands to keep himself from bursting with
laughter. Four times he stopped, and as many times did his laughter
break out afresh with the same violence as at first, whereat Don
Quixote grew furious, above all when he heard him say mockingly, "Thou
must know, friend Sancho, that of Heaven's will I was born in this our
iron age to revive revive in it the age of gold, or the golden as it
is called; I am he for whom perils, mighty achievements, and valiant
deeds are reserved; I am, I say again, he who is to revive the Knights
of the Round Table, the Twelve of France and the Nine Worthies; and he
who is to consign to oblivion the Platirs, the Tablantes, the
Olivantes and Tirantes, the Phoebuses and Belianises, with the whole
herd of famous knights-errant of days gone by, performing in these in
which I live such exploits, marvels, and feats of arms as shall
obscure their brightest deeds. Thou dost mark well, faithful and
trusty squire, the gloom of this night, its strange silence, the dull
confused murmur of those trees, the awful sound of that water in quest
of which we came, that seems as though it were precipitating and
dashing itself down from the lofty mountains of the Moon, and that
incessant hammering that wounds and pains our ears; which things all
together and each of itself are enough to instil fear, dread, and
dismay into the breast of Mars himself, much more into one not used to
hazards and adventures of the kind. Well, then, all this that I put
before thee is but an incentive and stimulant to my spirit, making my
heart burst in my bosom through eagerness to engage in this adventure,
arduous as it promises to be; therefore tighten Rocinante's girths a
little, and God be with thee; wait for me here three days and no more,
and if in that time I come not back, thou canst return to our village,
and thence, to do me a favour and a service, thou wilt go to El
Toboso, where thou shalt say to my incomparable lady Dulcinea that her
captive knight hath died in attempting things that might make him
worthy of being called hers." When Sancho heard his master's words he
began to weep in the most pathetic way, saying: "Senor, I know not why
your worship wants to attempt this so dreadful adventure; it is night
now, no one sees us here, we can easily turn about and take ourselves
out of danger, even if we don't drink for three days to come; and as
there is no one to see us, all the less will there be anyone to set us
down as cowards; besides, I have many a time heard the curate of our
village, whom your worship knows well, preach that he who seeks danger
perishes in it; so it is not right to tempt God by trying so
tremendous a feat from which there can be no escape save by a miracle,
and Heaven has performed enough of them for your worship in delivering
you from being blanketed as I was, and bringing you out victorious and
safe and sound from among all those enemies that were with the dead
man; and if all this does not move or soften that hard heart, let this
thought and reflection move it, that you will have hardly quitted this
spot when from pure fear I shall yield my soul up to anyone that will
take it. I left home and wife and children to come and serve your
worship, trusting to do better and not worse; but as covetousness
bursts the bag, it has rent my hopes asunder, for just as I had them
highest about getting that wretched unlucky island your worship has so
often promised me, I see that instead and in lieu of it you mean to
desert me now in a place so far from human reach: for God's sake,
master mine, deal not so unjustly by me, and if your worship will not
entirely give up attempting this feat, at least put it off till
morning, for by what the lore I learned when I was a shepherd tells me
it cannot want three hours of dawn now, because the mouth of the Horn
is overhead and makes midnight in the line of the left arm." "How
canst thou see, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "where it makes that line,
or where this mouth or this occiput is that thou talkest of, when the
night is so dark that there is not a star to be seen in the whole
heaven?" "That's true," said Sancho, "but fear has sharp eyes, and
sees things underground, much more above in heavens; besides, there is
good reason to show that it now wants but little of day." "Let it want
what it may," replied Don Quixote, "it shall not be said of me now or
at any time that tears or entreaties turned me aside from doing what
was in accordance with knightly usage; and so I beg of thee, Sancho,
to hold thy peace, for God, who has put it into my heart to undertake
now this so unexampled and terrible adventure, will take care to watch
over my safety and console thy sorrow; what thou hast to do is to
tighten Rocinante's girths well, and wait here, for I shall come back
shortly, alive or dead." Sancho perceiving it his master's final
resolve, and how little his tears, counsels, and entreaties prevailed
with him, determined to have recourse to his own ingenuity and compel
him, if he could, to wait till daylight; and so, while tightening the
girths of the horse, he quietly and without being felt, with his ass'
halter tied both Rocinante's legs, so that when Don Quixote strove to
go he was unable as the horse could only move by jumps. Seeing the
success of his trick, Sancho Panza said: "See there, senor! Heaven,
moved by my tears and prayers, has so ordered it that Rocinante cannot
stir; and if you will be obstinate, and spur and strike him, you will
only provoke fortune, and kick, as they say, against the pricks." Don
Quixote at this grew desperate, but the more he drove his heels into
the horse, the less he stirred him; and not having any suspicion of
the tying, he was fain to resign himself and wait till daybreak or
until Rocinante could move, firmly persuaded that all this came of
something other than Sancho's ingenuity. So he said to him, "As it is
so, Sancho, and as Rocinante cannot move, I am content to wait till
dawn smiles upon us, even though I weep while it delays its coming."
"There is no need to weep," answered Sancho, "for I will amuse your
worship by telling stories from this till daylight, unless indeed you
like to dismount and lie down to sleep a little on the green grass
after the fashion of knights-errant, so as to be fresher when day
comes and the moment arrives for attempting this extraordinary
adventure you are looking forward to." "What art thou talking about
dismounting or sleeping for?" said Don Quixote. "Am I, thinkest thou,
one of those knights that take their rest in the presence of danger?
Sleep thou who art born to sleep, or do as thou wilt, for I will act
as I think most consistent with my character." "Be not angry, master
mine," replied Sancho, "I did not mean to say that;" and coming close
to him he laid one hand on the pommel of the saddle and the other on
the cantle so that he held his master's left thigh in his embrace, not
daring to separate a finger's width from him; so much afraid was he of
the strokes which still resounded with a regular beat. Don Quixote
bade him tell some story to amuse him as he had proposed, to which
Sancho replied that he would if his dread of what he heard would let
him; "Still," said he, "I will strive to tell a story which, if I can
manage to relate it, and nobody interferes with the telling, is the
best of stories, and let your worship give me your attention, for here
I begin. What was, was; and may the good that is to come be for all,
and the evil for him who goes to look for it--your worship must know
that the beginning the old folk used to put to their tales was not
just as each one pleased; it was a maxim of Cato Zonzorino the Roman,
that says 'the evil for him that goes to look for it,' and it comes as
pat to the purpose now as ring to finger, to show that your worship
should keep quiet and not go looking for evil in any quarter, and that
we should go back by some other road, since nobody forces us to follow
this in which so many terrors affright us." "Go on with thy story,
Sancho," said Don Quixote, "and leave the choice of our road to my
care." "I say then," continued Sancho, "that in a village of
Estremadura there was a goat-shepherd--that is to say, one who tended
goats--which shepherd or goatherd, as my story goes, was called Lope
Ruiz, and this Lope Ruiz was in love with a shepherdess called
Torralva, which shepherdess called Torralva was the daughter of a rich
grazier, and this rich grazier-" "If that is the way thou tellest thy
tale, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "repeating twice all thou hast to
say, thou wilt not have done these two days; go straight on with it,
and tell it like a reasonable man, or else say nothing." "Tales are
always told in my country in the very way I am telling this," answered
Sancho, "and I cannot tell it in any other, nor is it right of your
worship to ask me to make new customs." "Tell it as thou wilt,"
replied Don Quixote; "and as fate will have it that I cannot help
listening to thee, go on." "And so, lord of my soul," continued
Sancho, as I have said, this shepherd was in love with Torralva the
shepherdess, who was a wild buxom lass with something of the look of a
man about her, for she had little moustaches; I fancy I see her now."
"Then you knew her?" said Don Quixote. "I did not know her," said
Sancho, "but he who told me the story said it was so true and certain
that when I told it to another I might safely declare and swear I had
seen it all myself. And so in course of time, the devil, who never
sleeps and puts everything in confusion, contrived that the love the
shepherd bore the shepherdess turned into hatred and ill-will, and the
reason, according to evil tongues, was some little jealousy she caused
him that crossed the line and trespassed on forbidden ground; and so
much did the shepherd hate her from that time forward that, in order
to escape from her, he determined to quit the country and go where he
should never set eyes on her again. Torralva, when she found herself
spurned by Lope, was immediately smitten with love for him, though she
had never loved him before." "That is the natural way of women," said
Don Quixote, "to scorn the one that loves them, and love the one that
hates them: go on, Sancho." "It came to pass," said Sancho, "that the
shepherd carried out his intention, and driving his goats before him
took his way across the plains of Estremadura to pass over into the
Kingdom of Portugal. Torralva, who knew of it, went after him, and on
foot and barefoot followed him at a distance, with a pilgrim's staff
in her hand and a scrip round her neck, in which she carried, it is
said, a bit of looking-glass and a piece of a comb and some little pot
or other of paint for her face; but let her carry what she did, I am
not going to trouble myself to prove it; all I say is, that the
shepherd, they say, came with his flock to cross over the river
Guadiana, which was at that time swollen and almost overflowing its
banks, and at the spot he came to there was neither ferry nor boat nor
anyone to carry him or his flock to the other side, at which he was
much vexed, for he perceived that Torralva was approaching and would
give him great annoyance with her tears and entreaties; however, he
went looking about so closely that he discovered a fisherman who had
alongside of him a boat so small that it could only hold one person
and one goat; but for all that he spoke to him and agreed with him to
carry himself and his three hundred goats across. The fisherman got
into the boat and carried one goat over; he came back and carried
another over; he came back again, and again brought over another--let
your worship keep count of the goats the fisherman is taking across,
for if one escapes the memory there will be an end of the story, and
it will be impossible to tell another word of it. To proceed, I must
tell you the landing place on the other side was miry and slippery,
and the fisherman lost a great deal of time in going and coming; still
he returned for another goat, and another, and another." "Take it for
granted he brought them all across," said Don Quixote, "and don't keep
going and coming in this way, or thou wilt not make an end of bringing
them over this twelvemonth." "How many have gone across so far?" said
Sancho. "How the devil do I know?" replied Don Quixote. "There it is,"
said Sancho, "what I told you, that you must keep a good count; well
then, by God, there is an end of the story, for there is no going any
farther." "How can that be?" said Don Quixote; "is it so essential to
the story to know to a nicety the goats that have crossed over, that
if there be a mistake of one in the reckoning, thou canst not go on
with it?" "No, senor, not a bit," replied Sancho; "for when I asked
your worship to tell me how many goats had crossed, and you answered
you did not know, at that very instant all I had to say passed away
out of my memory, and, faith, there was much virtue in it, and
entertainment." "So, then," said Don Quixote, "the story has come to
an end?" "As much as my mother has," said Sancho. "In truth," said Don
Quixote, "thou hast told one of the rarest stories, tales, or
histories, that anyone in the world could have imagined, and such a
way of telling it and ending it was never seen nor will be in a
lifetime; though I expected nothing else from thy excellent
understanding. But I do not wonder, for perhaps those ceaseless
strokes may have confused thy wits." "All that may be," replied
Sancho, "but I know that as to my story, all that can be said is that
it ends there where the mistake in the count of the passage of the
goats begins." "Let it end where it will, well and good," said Don
Quixote, "and let us see if Rocinante can go;" and again he spurred
him, and again Rocinante made jumps and remained where he was, so well
tied was he. Just then, whether it was the cold of the morning that
was now approaching, or that he had eaten something laxative at
supper, or that it was only natural (as is most likely), Sancho felt a
desire to do what no one could do for him; but so great was the fear
that had penetrated his heart, he dared not separate himself from his
master by as much as the black of his nail; to escape doing what he
wanted was, however, also impossible; so what he did for peace's sake
was to remove his right hand, which held the back of the saddle, and
with it to untie gently and silently the running string which alone
held up his breeches, so that on loosening it they at once fell down
round his feet like fetters; he then raised his shirt as well as he
could and bared his hind quarters, no slim ones. But, this
accomplished, which he fancied was all he had to do to get out of this
terrible strait and embarrassment, another still greater difficulty
presented itself, for it seemed to him impossible to relieve himself
without making some noise, and he ground his teeth and squeezed his
shoulders together, holding his breath as much as he could; but in
spite of his precautions he was unlucky enough after all to make a
little noise, very different from that which was causing him so much
fear. Don Quixote, hearing it, said, "What noise is that, Sancho?" "I
don't know, senor," said he; "it must be something new, for adventures
and misadventures never begin with a trifle." Once more he tried his
luck, and succeeded so well, that without any further noise or
disturbance he found himself relieved of the burden that had given him
so much discomfort. But as Don Quixote's sense of smell was as acute
as his hearing, and as Sancho was so closely linked with him that the
fumes rose almost in a straight line, it could not be but that some
should reach his nose, and as soon as they did he came to its relief
by compressing it between his fingers, saying in a rather snuffing
tone, "Sancho, it strikes me thou art in great fear." "I am," answered
Sancho; "but how does your worship perceive it now more than ever?"
"Because just now thou smellest stronger than ever, and not of
ambergris," answered Don Quixote. "Very likely," said Sancho, "but
that's not my fault, but your worship's, for leading me about at
unseasonable hours and at such unwonted paces." "Then go back three or
four, my friend," said Don Quixote, all the time with his fingers to
his nose; "and for the future pay more attention to thy person and to
what thou owest to mine; for it is my great familiarity with thee that
has bred this contempt." "I'll bet," replied Sancho, "that your
worship thinks I have done something I ought not with my person." "It
makes it worse to stir it, friend Sancho," returned Don Quixote. With
this and other talk of the same sort master and man passed the night,
till Sancho, perceiving that daybreak was coming on apace, very
cautiously untied Rocinante and tied up his breeches. As soon as
Rocinante found himself free, though by nature he was not at all
mettlesome, he seemed to feel lively and began pawing--for as to
capering, begging his pardon, he knew not what it meant. Don Quixote,
then, observing that Rocinante could move, took it as a good sign and
a signal that he should attempt the dread adventure. By this time day
had fully broken and everything showed distinctly, and Don Quixote saw
that he was among some tall trees, chestnuts, which cast a very deep
shade; he perceived likewise that the sound of the strokes did not
cease, but could not discover what caused it, and so without any
further delay he let Rocinante feel the spur, and once more taking
leave of Sancho, he told him to wait for him there three days at most,
as he had said before, and if he should not have returned by that
time, he might feel sure it had been God's will that he should end his
days in that perilous adventure. He again repeated the message and
commission with which he was to go on his behalf to his lady Dulcinea,
and said he was not to be uneasy as to the payment of his services,
for before leaving home he had made his will, in which he would find
himself fully recompensed in the matter of wages in due proportion to
the time he had served; but if God delivered him safe, sound, and
unhurt out of that danger, he might look upon the promised island as
much more than certain. Sancho began to weep afresh on again hearing
the affecting words of his good master, and resolved to stay with him
until the final issue and end of the business. From these tears and
this honourable resolve of Sancho Panza's the author of this history
infers that he must have been of good birth and at least an old
Christian; and the feeling he displayed touched his but not so much as
to make him show any weakness; on the contrary, hiding what he felt as
well as he could, he began to move towards that quarter whence the
sound of the water and of the strokes seemed to come. Sancho followed
him on foot, leading by the halter, as his custom was, his ass, his
constant comrade in prosperity or adversity; and advancing some
distance through the shady chestnut trees they came upon a little
meadow at the foot of some high rocks, down which a mighty rush of
water flung itself. At the foot of the rocks were some rudely
constructed houses looking more like ruins than houses, from among
which came, they perceived, the din and clatter of blows, which still
continued without intermission. Rocinante took fright at the noise of
the water and of the blows, but quieting him Don Quixote advanced step
by step towards the houses, commending himself with all his heart to
heaven and to his Dulcinea, as was his custom on the eve of any combat
that awaited him, proceeded to take a little more distance, as he saw
his antagonist was doing the same; then, without blast of trumpet or
other warlike instrument to give them the signal to charge, both at
the same instant wheeled their horses; and he of the White Moon, being
the swifter, met Don Quixote after having traversed two-thirds of the
course, and there encountered him with such violence that, without
touching him with his lance (for he held it high, to all appearance
purposely), he hurled Don Quixote and Rocinante to the earth, a
perilous fall. He sprang upon him at once, and placing the lance over
his visor said to him, "You are vanquished, sir knight, nay dead
unless you admit the conditions of our defiance." Don Quixote, bruised
and stupefied, without raising his visor said in a weak feeble voice
as if he were speaking out of a tomb, "Dulcinea del Toboso is the
fairest woman in the world, and I the most unfortunate knight on
earth; it is not fitting that this truth should suffer by my
feebleness; drive your lance home, sir knight, and take my life, since
you have taken away my honour." "That will I not, in sooth," said he
of the White Moon; "live the fame of the lady Dulcinea's beauty
undimmed as ever; all I require is that the great Don Quixote retire
to his own home for a year, or for so long a time as shall by me be
enjoined upon him, as we agreed before engaging in this combat." The
viceroy, Don Antonio, and several others who were present heard all
this, and heard too how Don Quixote replied that so long as nothing in
prejudice of Dulcinea was demanded of him, he would observe all the
rest like a true and loyal knight. The engagement given, he of the
White Moon wheeled about, and making obeisance to the viceroy with a
movement of the head, rode away into the city at a half gallop. The
viceroy bade Don Antonio hasten after him, and by some means or other
find out who he was. They raised Don Quixote up and uncovered his
face, and found him pale and bathed with sweat. Rocinante from the
mere hard measure he had received lay unable to stir for the present.
Sancho, wholly dejected and woebegone, knew not what to say or do. He
fancied that all was a dream, that the whole business was a piece of
enchantment. Here was his master defeated, and bound not to take up
arms for a year. He saw the light of the glory of his achievements
obscured; the hopes of the promises lately made him swept away like
smoke before the wind; Rocinante, he feared, was crippled for life,
and his master's bones out of joint; for if he were only shaken out of
his madness it would be no small luck. In the end they carried him
into the city in a hand-chair which the viceroy sent for, and thither
the viceroy himself returned, cager to ascertain who this Knight of
the White Moon was who had left Don Quixote in such a sad plight.
CHAPTER LXV. WHEREIN IS MADE KNOWN WHO THE KNIGHT OF THE WHITE MOON
WAS; LIKEWISE DON GREGORIO'S RELEASE, AND OTHER EVENTS Don Antonia
Moreno followed the Knight of the White Moon, and a number of boys
followed him too, nay pursued him, until they had him fairly housed in
a hostel in the heart of the city. Don Antonio, eager to make his
acquaintance, entered also; a squire came out to meet him and remove
his armour, and he shut himself into a lower room, still attended by
Don Antonio, whose bread would not bake until he had found out who he
was. He of the White Moon, seeing then that the gentleman would not
leave him, said, "I know very well, senor, what you have come for; it
is to find out who I am; and as there is no reason why I should
conceal it from you, while my servant here is taking off my armour I
will tell you the true state of the case, without leaving out
anything. You must know, senor, that I am called the bachelor Samson
Carrasco. I am of the same village as Don Quixote of La Mancha, whose
craze and folly make all of us who know him feel pity for him, and I
am one of those who have felt it most; and persuaded that his chance
of recovery lay in quiet and keeping at home and in his own house, I
hit upon a device for keeping him there. Three months ago, therefore,
I went out to meet him as a knight-errant, under the assumed name of
the Knight of the Mirrors, intending to engage him in combat and
overcome him without hurting him, making it the condition of our
combat that the vanquished should be at the disposal of the victor.
What I meant to demand of him (for I regarded him as vanquished
already) was that he should return to his own village, and not leave
it for a whole year, by which time he might be cured. But fate ordered
it otherwise, for he vanquished me and unhorsed me, and so my plan
failed. He went his way, and I came back conquered, covered with
shame, and sorely bruised by my fall, which was a particularly
dangerous one. But this did not quench my desire to meet him again and
overcome him, as you have seen to-day. And as he is so scrupulous in
his observance of the laws of knight-errantry, he will, no doubt, in
order to keep his word, obey the injunction I have laid upon him.
This, senor, is how the matter stands, and I have nothing more to tell
you. I implore of you not to betray me, or tell Don Quixote who I am;
so that my honest endeavours may be successful, and that a man of
excellent wits--were he only rid of the fooleries of chivalry--may get
them back again." "O senor," said Don Antonio, "may God forgive you
the wrong you have done the whole world in trying to bring the most
amusing madman in it back to his senses. Do you not see, senor, that
the gain by Don Quixote's sanity can never equal the enjoyment his
crazes give? But my belief is that all the senor bachelor's pains will
be of no avail to bring a man so hopelessly cracked to his senses
again; and if it were not uncharitable, I would say may Don Quixote
never be cured, for by his recovery we lose not only his own
drolleries, but his squire Sancho Panza's too, any one of which is
enough to turn melancholy itself into merriment. However, I'll hold my
peace and say nothing to him, and we'll see whether I am right in my
suspicion that Senor Carrasco's efforts will be fruitless." The
bachelor replied that at all events the affair promised well, and he
hoped for a happy result from it; and putting his services at Don
Antonio's commands he took his leave of him; and having had his armour
packed at once upon a mule, he rode away from the city the same day on
the horse he rode to battle, and returned to his own country without
meeting any adventure calling for record in this veracious history.
Don Antonio reported to the viceroy what Carrasco told him, and the
viceroy was not very well pleased to hear it, for with Don Quixote's
retirement there was an end to the amusement of all who knew anything
of his mad doings. Six days did Don Quixote keep his bed, dejected,
melancholy, moody and out of sorts, brooding over the unhappy event of
his defeat. Sancho strove to comfort him, and among other things he
said to him, "Hold up your head, senor, and be of good cheer if you
can, and give thanks to heaven that if you have had a tumble to the
ground you have not come off with a broken rib; and, as you know that
'where they give they take,' and that 'there are not always fletches
where there are pegs,' a fig for the doctor, for there's no need of
him to cure this ailment. Let us go home, and give over going about in
search of adventures in strange lands and places; rightly looked at,
it is I that am the greater loser, though it is your worship that has
had the worse usage. With the government I gave up all wish to be a
governor again, but I did not give up all longing to be a count; and
that will never come to pass if your worship gives up becoming a king
by renouncing the calling of chivalry; and so my hopes are going to
turn into smoke." "Peace, Sancho," said Don Quixote; "thou seest my
suspension and retirement is not to exceed a year; I shall soon return
to my honoured calling, and I shall not be at a loss for a kingdom to
win and a county to bestow on thee." "May God hear it and sin be
deaf," said Sancho; "I have always heard say that 'a good hope is
better than a bad holding, and a good grievance better than a bad
compensation. I speak in this way, Sancho, to show you that I can
shower down proverbs just as well as yourself; and in short, I mean to
say, and I do say, that if you don't like to come on reward with me,
and run the same chance that I run, God be with you and make a saint
of you; for I shall find plenty of squires more obedient and
painstaking, and not so thickheaded or talkative as you are." When
Sancho heard his master's firm, resolute language, a cloud came over
the sky with him and the wings of his heart drooped, for he had made
sure that his master would not go without him for all the wealth of
the world; and as he stood there dumbfoundered and moody, Samson
Carrasco came in with the housekeeper and niece, who were anxious to
hear by what arguments he was about to dissuade their master from
going to seek adventures. The arch wag Samson came forward, and
embracing him as he had done before, said with a loud voice, "O flower
of knight-errantry! O shining light of arms! O honour and mirror of
the Spanish nation! may God Almighty in his infinite power grant that
any person or persons, who would impede or hinder thy third sally, may
find no way out of the labyrinth of their schemes, nor ever accomplish
what they most desire!" And then, turning to the housekeeper, he said,
"Mistress housekeeper may just as well give over saying the prayer of
Santa Apollonia, for I know it is the positive determination of the
spheres that Senor Don Quixote shall proceed to put into execution his
new and lofty designs; and I should lay a heavy burden on my
conscience did I not urge and persuade this knight not to keep the
might of his strong arm and the virtue of his valiant spirit any
longer curbed and checked, for by his inactivity he is defrauding the
world of the redress of wrongs, of the protection of orphans, of the
honour of virgins, of the aid of widows, and of the support of wives,
and other matters of this kind appertaining, belonging, proper and
peculiar to the order of knight-errantry. On, then, my lord Don
Quixote, beautiful and brave, let your worship and highness set out
to-day rather than to-morrow; and if anything be needed for the
execution of your purpose, here am I ready in person and purse to
supply the want; and were it requisite to attend your magnificence as
squire, I should esteem it the happiest good fortune." At this, Don
Quixote, turning to Sancho, said, "Did I not tell thee, Sancho, there
would be squires enough and to spare for me? See now who offers to
become one; no less than the illustrious bachelor Samson Carrasco, the
perpetual joy and delight of the courts of the Salamancan schools,
sound in body, discreet, patient under heat or cold, hunger or thirst,
with all the qualifications requisite to make a knight-errant's
squire! But heaven forbid that, to gratify my own inclination, I
should shake or shatter this pillar of letters and vessel of the
sciences, and cut down this towering palm of the fair and liberal
arts. Let this new Samson remain in his own country, and, bringing
honour to it, bring honour at the same time on the grey heads of his
venerable parents; for I will be content with any squire that comes to
hand, as Sancho does not deign to accompany me." "I do deign," said
Sancho, deeply moved and with tears in his eyes; "it shall not be said
of me, master mine," he continued, "'the bread eaten and the company
dispersed.' Nay, I come of no ungrateful stock, for all the world
knows, but particularly my own town, who the Panzas from whom I am
descended were; and, what is more, I know and have learned, by many
good words and deeds, your worship's desire to show me favour; and if
I have been bargaining more or less about my wages, it was only to
please my wife, who, when she sets herself to press a point, no hammer
drives the hoops of a cask as she drives one to do what she wants;
but, after all, a man must be a man, and a woman a woman; and as I am
a man anyhow, which I can't deny, I will be one in my own house too,
let who will take it amiss; and so there's nothing more to do but for
your worship to make your will with its codicil in such a way that it
can't be provoked, and let us set out at once, to save Senor Samson's
soul from suffering, as he says his conscience obliges him to persuade
your worship to sally out upon the world a third time; so I offer
again to serve your worship faithfully and loyally, as well and better
than all the squires that served knights-errant in times past or
present." The bachelor was filled with amazement when he heard
Sancho's phraseology and style of talk, for though he had read the
first part of his master's history he never thought that he could be
so droll as he was there described; but now, hearing him talk of a
"will and codicil that could not be revoked," he believed all he had
read of him, and set him down as one of good blood; and it would be
strange were it not so; praise has ever been the reward of virtue, and
those who are virtuous cannot fail to receive commendation. There are
two roads, my daughters, by which men may reach wealth and honours;
one is that of letters, the other that of arms. I have more of arms
than of letters in my composition, and, judging by my inclination to
arms, was born under the influence of the planet Mars. I am,
therefore, in a measure constrained to follow that road, and by it I
must travel in spite of all the world, and it will be labour in vain
for you to urge me to resist what heaven wills, fate ordains, reason
requires, and, above all, my own inclination favours; for knowing as I
do the countless toils that are the accompaniments of knight-errantry,
I know, too, the infinite blessings that are attained by it; I know
that the path of virtue is very narrow, and the road of vice broad and
spacious; I know their ends and goals are different, for the broad and
easy road of vice ends in death, and the narrow and toilsome one of
virtue in life, and not transitory life, but in that which has no end;
I know, as our great Castilian poet says, that-- It is by rugged paths
like these they go That scale the heights of immortality, Unreached by
those that falter here below." "Woe is me!" exclaimed the niece, "my
lord is a poet, too! He knows everything, and he can do everything; I
will bet, if he chose to turn mason, he could make a house as easily
as a cage." "I can tell you, niece," replied Don Quixote, "if these
chivalrous thoughts did not engage all my faculties, there would be
nothing that I could not do, nor any sort of knickknack that would not
come from my hands, particularly cages and tooth-picks." At this
moment there came a knocking at the door, and when they asked who was
there, Sancho Panza made answer that it was he. The instant the
housekeeper knew who it was, she ran to hide herself so as not to see
him; in such abhorrence did she hold him. The niece let him in, and
his master Don Quixote came forward to receive him with open arms, and
the pair shut themselves up in his room, where they had another
conversation not inferior to the previous one. CHAPTER VII. OF WHAT
PASSED BETWEEN DON QUIXOTE AND HIS SQUIRE SANCHO ON THE WAY TO THEIR
VILLAGE CHAPTER LXXII OF HOW DON QUIXOTE AND SANCHO REACHED THEIR
VILLAGE All that day Don Quixote and Sancho remained in the village
and inn waiting for night, the one to finish off his task of scourging
in the open country, the other to see it accomplished, for therein lay
the accomplishment of his wishes. Meanwhile there arrived at the
hostelry a traveller on horseback with three or four servants, one of
whom said to him who appeared to be the master, "Here, Senor Don
Alvaro Tarfe, your worship may take your siesta to-day; the quarters
seem clean and cool." When he heard this Don Quixote said to Sancho,
"Look here, Sancho; on turning over the leaves of that book of the
Second Part of my history I think I came casually upon this name of
Don Alvaro Tarfe." "Very likely," said Sancho; "we had better let him
dismount, and by-and-by we can ask about it." The gentleman
dismounted, and the landlady gave him a room on the ground floor
opposite Don Quixote's and adorned with painted serge hangings of the
same sort. The newly arrived gentleman put on a summer coat, and
coming out to the gateway of the hostelry, which was wide and cool,
addressing Don Quixote, who was pacing up and down there, he asked,
"In what direction your worship bound, gentle sir?" "To a village near
this which is my own village," replied Don Quixote; "and your worship,
where are you bound for?" "I am going to Granada, senor," said the
gentleman, "to my own country." "And a goodly country," said Don
Quixote; "but will your worship do me the favour of telling me your
name, for it strikes me it is of more importance to me to know it than
I can tell you." "My name is Don Alvaro Tarfe," replied the traveller.
To which Don Quixote returned, "I have no doubt whatever that your
worship is that Don Alvaro Tarfe who appears in print in the Second
Part of the history of Don Quixote of La Mancha, lately printed and
published by a new author." "I am the same," replied the gentleman;
"and that same Don Quixote, the principal personage in the said
history, was a very great friend of mine, and it was I who took him
away from home, or at least induced him to come to some jousts that
were to be held at Saragossa, whither I was going myself; indeed, I
showed him many kindnesses, and saved him from having his shoulders
touched up by the executioner because of his extreme rashness." "Tell
me, Senor Don Alvaro," said Don Quixote, "am I at all like that Don
Quixote you talk of?" "No indeed," replied the traveller, "not a bit."
"And that Don Quixote-" said our one, "had he with him a squire called
Sancho Panza?" "He had," said Don Alvaro; "but though he had the name
of being very droll, I never heard him say anything that had any
drollery in it." "That I can well believe," said Sancho at this, "for
to come out with drolleries is not in everybody's line; and that
Sancho your worship speaks of, gentle sir, must be some great
scoundrel, dunderhead, and thief, all in one; for I am the real Sancho
Panza, and I have more drolleries than if it rained them; let your
worship only try; come along with me for a year or so, and you will
find they fall from me at every turn, and so rich and so plentiful
that though mostly I don't know what I am saying I make everybody that
hears me laugh. And the real Don Quixote of La Mancha, the famous, the
valiant, the wise, the lover, the righter of wrongs, the guardian of
minors and orphans, the protector of widows, the killer of damsels, he
who has for his sole mistress the peerless Dulcinea del Toboso, is
this gentleman before you, my master; all other Don Quixotes and all
other Sancho Panzas are dreams and mockeries." "By God I believe it,"
said Don Alvaro; "for you have uttered more drolleries, my friend, in
the few words you have spoken than the other Sancho Panza in all I
ever heard from him, and they were not a few. He was more greedy than
well-spoken, and more dull than droll; and I am convinced that the
enchanters who persecute Don Quixote the Good have been trying to
persecute me with Don Quixote the Bad. But I don't know what to say,
for I am ready to swear I left him shut up in the Casa del Nuncio at
Toledo, and here another Don Quixote turns up, though a very different
one from mine." "I don't know whether I am good," said Don Quixote,
"but I can safely say I am not 'the Bad;' and to prove it, let me tell
you, Senor Don Alvaro Tarfe, I have never in my life been in
Saragossa; so far from that, when it was told me that this imaginary
Don Quixote had been present at the jousts in that city, I declined to
enter it, in order to drag his falsehood before the face of the world;
and so I went on straight to Barcelona, the treasure-house of
courtesy, haven of strangers, asylum of the poor, home of the valiant,
champion of the wronged, pleasant exchange of firm friendships, and
city unrivalled in site and beauty. And though the adventures that
befell me there are not by any means matters of enjoyment, but rather
of regret, I do not regret them, simply because I have seen it. In a
word, Senor Don Alvaro Tarfe, I am Don Quixote of La Mancha, whose
calling it is to give aid to the needy of all sorts; and that being
so, it is not necessary for you, senora, to make any appeal to
benevolence, or deal in preambles, only to tell your woes plainly and
straightforwardly: for you have hearers that will know how, if not to
remedy them, to sympathise with them." On hearing this, the Distressed
Duenna made as though she would throw herself at Don Quixote's feet,
and actually did fall before them and said, as she strove to embrace
them, "Before these feet and legs I cast myself, O unconquered knight,
as before, what they are, the foundations and pillars of
knight-errantry; these feet I desire to kiss, for upon their steps
hangs and depends the sole remedy for my misfortune, O valorous
errant, whose veritable achievements leave behind and eclipse the
fabulous ones of the Amadises, Esplandians, and Belianises!" Then
turning from Don Quixote to Sancho Panza, and grasping his hands, she
said, "O thou, most loyal squire that ever served knight-errant in
this present age or ages past, whose goodness is more extensive than
the beard of Trifaldin my companion here of present, well mayest thou
boast thyself that, in serving the great Don Quixote, thou art
serving, summed up in one, the whole host of knights that have ever
borne arms in the world. I conjure thee, by what thou owest to thy
most loyal goodness, that thou wilt become my kind intercessor with
thy master, that he speedily give aid to this most humble and most
unfortunate countess." To this Sancho made answer, "As to my goodness,
senora, being as long and as great as your squire's beard, it matters
very little to me; may I have my soul well bearded and moustached when
it comes to quit this life, that's the point; about beards here below
I care little or nothing; but without all these blandishments and
prayers, I will beg my master (for I know he loves me, and, besides,
he has need of me just now for a certain business) to help and aid
your worship as far as he can; unpack your woes and lay them before
us, and leave us to deal with them, for we'll be all of one mind." The
duke and duchess, as it was they who had made the experiment of this
adventure, were ready to burst with laughter at all this, and between
themselves they commended the clever acting of the Trifaldi, who,
returning to her seat, said, "Queen Dona Maguncia reigned over the
famous kingdom of Kandy, which lies between the great Trapobana and
the Southern Sea, two leagues beyond Cape Comorin. She was the widow
of King Archipiela, her lord and husband, and of their marriage they
had issue the Princess Antonomasia, heiress of the kingdom; which
Princess Antonomasia was reared and brought up under my care and
direction, I being the oldest and highest in rank of her mother's
duennas. Time passed, and the young Antonomasia reached the age of
fourteen, and such a perfection of beauty, that nature could not raise
it higher. Then, it must not be supposed her intelligence was
childish; she was as intelligent as she was fair, and she was fairer
than all the world; and is so still, unless the envious fates and
hard-hearted sisters three have cut for her the thread of life. But
that they have not, for Heaven will not suffer so great a wrong to
Earth, as it would be to pluck unripe the grapes of the fairest
vineyard on its surface. Of this beauty, to which my poor feeble
tongue has failed to do justice, countless princes, not only of that
country, but of others, were enamoured, and among them a private
gentleman, who was at the court, dared to raise his thoughts to the
heaven of so great beauty, trusting to his youth, his gallant bearing,
his numerous accomplishments and graces, and his quickness and
readiness of wit; for I may tell your highnesses, if I am not wearying
you, that he played the guitar so as to make it speak, and he was,
besides, a poet and a great dancer, and he could make birdcages so
well, that by making them alone he might have gained a livelihood, had
he found himself reduced to utter poverty; and gifts and graces of
this kind are enough to bring down a mountain, not to say a tender
young girl. But all his gallantry, wit, and gaiety, all his graces and
accomplishments, would have been of little or no avail towards gaining
the fortress of my pupil, had not the impudent thief taken the
precaution of gaining me over first. First, the villain and heartless
vagabond sought to win my good-will and purchase my compliance, so as
to get me, like a treacherous warder, to deliver up to him the keys of
the fortress I had in charge. In a word, he gained an influence over
my mind, and overcame my resolutions with I know not what trinkets and
jewels he gave me; but it was some verses I heard him singing one
night from a grating that opened on the street where he lived, that,
more than anything else, made me give way and led to my fall; and if I
remember rightly they ran thus: From that sweet enemy of mine My
bleeding heart hath had its wound; And to increase the pain I'm bound
To suffer and to make no sign. The lines seemed pearls to me and his
voice sweet as syrup; and afterwards, I may say ever since then,
looking at the misfortune into which I have fallen, I have thought
that poets, as Plato advised, ought to be banished from all
well-ordered States; at least the amatory ones, for they write verses,
not like those of 'The Marquis of Mantua,' that delight and draw tears
from the women and children, but sharp-pointed conceits that pierce
the heart like soft thorns, and like the lightning strike it, leaving
the raiment uninjured. Another time he sang: Come Death, so subtly
veiled that I Thy coming know not, how or when, Lest it should give me
life again To find how sweet it is to die. --and other verses and
burdens of the same sort, such as enchant when sung and fascinate when
written. And then, when they condescend to compose a sort of verse
that was at that time in vogue in Kandy, which they call seguidillas!
Then it is that hearts leap and laughter breaks forth, and the body
grows restless and all the senses turn quicksilver. And so I say,
sirs, that these troubadours richly deserve to be banished to the
isles of the lizards. Though it is not they that are in fault, but the
simpletons that extol them, and the fools that believe in them; and
had I been the faithful duenna I should have been, his stale conceits
would have never moved me, nor should I have been taken in by such
phrases as 'in death I live,' 'in ice I burn,' 'in flames I shiver,'
'hopeless I hope,' 'I go and stay,' and paradoxes of that sort which
their writings are full of. And then when they promise the Phoenix of
Arabia, the crown of Ariadne, the horses of the Sun, the pearls of the
South, the gold of Tibar, and the balsam of Panchaia! Then it is they
give a loose to their pens, for it costs them little to make promises
they have no intention or power of fulfilling. But where am I
wandering to? Woe is me, unfortunate being! What madness or folly
leads me to speak of the faults of others, when there is so much to be
said about my own? Again, woe is me, hapless that I am! it was not
verses that conquered me, but my own simplicity; it was not music made
me yield, but my own imprudence; my own great ignorance and little
caution opened the way and cleared the path for Don Clavijo's
advances, for that was the name of the gentleman I have referred to;
and so, with my help as go-between, he found his way many a time into
the chamber of the deceived Antonomasia (deceived not by him but by
me) under the title of a lawful husband; for, sinner though I was,
would not have allowed him to approach the edge of her shoe-sole
without being her husband. No, no, not that; marriage must come first
in any business of this sort that I take in hand. But there was one
hitch in this case, which was that of inequality of rank, Don Clavijo
being a private gentleman, and the Princess Antonomasia, as I said,
heiress to the kingdom. The entanglement remained for some time a
secret, kept hidden by my cunning precautions, until I perceived that
a certain expansion of waist in Antonomasia must before long disclose
it, the dread of which made us all there take counsel together, and it
was agreed that before the mischief came to light, Don Clavijo should
demand Antonomasia as his wife before the Vicar, in virtue of an
agreement to marry him made by the princess, and drafted by my wit in
such binding terms that the might of Samson could not have broken it.
The necessary steps were taken; the Vicar saw the agreement, and took
the lady's confession; she confessed everything in full, and he
ordered her into the custody of a very worthy alguacil of the court."
"Are there alguacils of the court in Kandy, too," said Sancho at this,
"and poets, and seguidillas? I swear I think the world is the same all
over! But make haste, Senora Trifaldi; for it is late, and I am dying
to know the end of this long story." "I will," replied the countess.
CHAPTER XXXIX. IN WHICH THE TRIFALDI CONTINUES HER MARVELLOUS AND
MEMORABLE STORY CHAPTER XL OF MATTERS RELATING AND BELONGING TO THIS
ADVENTURE AND TO THIS MEMORABLE HISTORY Verily and truly all those who
find pleasure in histories like this ought show their gratitude to
Cide Hamete, its original author, for the scrupulous care he has taken
to set before us all its minute particulars, not leaving anything,
however trifling it may be, that he does not make clear and plain. He
portrays the thoughts, he reveals the fancies, he answers implied
questions, clears up doubts, sets objections at rest, and, in a word,
makes plain the smallest points the most inquisitive can desire to
know. O renowned author! O happy Don Quixote! O famous famous droll
Sancho! All and each, may ye live countless ages for the delight and
amusement of the dwellers on earth! The history goes on to say that
when Sancho saw the Distressed One faint he exclaimed: "I swear by the
faith of an honest man and the shades of all my ancestors the Panzas,
that never I did see or hear of, nor has my master related or
conceived in his mind, such an adventure as this. A thousand
devils--not to curse thee--take thee, Malambruno, for an enchanter and
a giant! Couldst thou find no other sort of punishment for these
sinners but bearding them? Would it not have been better--it would
have been better for them--to have taken off half their noses from the
middle upwards, even though they'd have snuffled when they spoke, than
to have put beards on them? I'll bet they have not the means of paying
anybody to shave them." "That is the truth, senor," said one of the
twelve; "we have not the money to get ourselves shaved, and so we
have, some of us, taken to using sticking-plasters by way of an
economical remedy, for by applying them to our faces and plucking them
off with a jerk we are left as bare and smooth as the bottom of a
stone mortar. There are, to be sure, women in Kandy that go about from
house to house to remove down, and trim eyebrows, and make cosmetics
for the use of the women, but we, the duennas of my lady, would never
let them in, for most of them have a flavour of agents that have
ceased to be principals; and if we are not relieved by Senor Don
Quixote we shall be carried to our graves with beards." "I will pluck
out my own in the land of the Moors," said Don Quixote, "if I don't
cure yours." At this instant the Trifaldi recovered from her swoon and
said, "The chink of that promise, valiant knight, reached my ears in
the midst of my swoon, and has been the means of reviving me and
bringing back my senses; and so once more I implore you, illustrious
errant, indomitable sir, to let your gracious promises be turned into
deeds." "There shall be no delay on my part," said Don Quixote.
"Bethink you, senora, of what I must do, for my heart is most eager to
serve you." "The fact is," replied the Distressed One, "it is five
thousand leagues, a couple more or less, from this to the kingdom of
Kandy, if you go by land; but if you go through the air and in a
straight line, it is three thousand two hundred and twenty-seven. You
must know, too, that Malambruno told me that, whenever fate provided
the knight our deliverer, he himself would send him a steed far better
and with less tricks than a post-horse; for he will be that same
wooden horse on which the valiant Pierres carried off the fair
Magalona; which said horse is guided by a peg he has in his forehead
that serves for a bridle, and flies through the air with such rapidity
that you would fancy the very devils were carrying him. This horse,
according to ancient tradition, was made by Merlin. He lent him to
Pierres, who was a friend of his, and who made long journeys with him,
and, as has been said, carried off the fair Magalona, bearing her
through the air on its haunches and making all who beheld them from
the earth gape with astonishment; and he never lent him save to those
whom he loved or those who paid him well; and since the great Pierres
we know of no one having mounted him until now. From him Malambruno
stole him by his magic art, and he has him now in his possession, and
makes use of him in his journeys which he constantly makes through
different parts of the world; he is here to-day, to-morrow in France,
and the next day in Potosi; and the best of it is the said horse
neither eats nor sleeps nor wears out shoes, and goes at an ambling
pace through the air without wings, so that he whom he has mounted
upon him can carry a cup full of water in his hand without spilling a
drop, so smoothly and easily does he go, for which reason the fair
Magalona enjoyed riding him greatly." "For going smoothly and easily,"
said Sancho at this, "give me my Dapple, though he can't go through
the air; but on the ground I'll back him against all the amblers in
the world." They all laughed, and the Distressed One continued: "And
this same horse, if so be that Malambruno is disposed to put an end to
our sufferings, will be here before us ere the night shall have
advanced half an hour; for he announced to me that the sign he would
give me whereby I might know that I had found the knight I was in
quest of, would be to send me the horse wherever he might be, speedily
and promptly." "And how many is there room for on this horse?" asked
Sancho. "Two," said the Distressed One, "one in the saddle, and the
other on the croup; and generally these two are knight and squire,
when there is no damsel that's being carried off." "I'd like to know,
Senora Distressed One," said Sancho, "what is the name of this horse?"
"His name," said the Distressed One, "is not the same as Bellerophon's
horse that was called Pegasus, or Alexander the Great's, called
Bucephalus, or Orlando Furioso's, the name of which was Brigliador,
nor yet Bayard, the horse of Reinaldos of Montalvan, nor Frontino like
Ruggiero's, nor Bootes or Peritoa, as they say the horses of the sun
were called, nor is he called Orelia, like the horse on which the
unfortunate Rodrigo, the last king of the Goths, rode to the battle
where he lost his life and his kingdom." "I'll bet," said Sancho,
"that as they have given him none of these famous names of well-known
horses, no more have they given him the name of my master's Rocinante,
which for being apt surpasses all that have been mentioned." "That is
true," said the bearded countess, "still it fits him very well, for he
is called Clavileno the Swift, which name is in accordance with his
being made of wood, with the peg he has in his forehead, and with the
swift pace at which he travels; and so, as far as name goes, he may
compare with the famous Rocinante." "I have nothing to say against his
name," said Sancho; "but with what sort of bridle or halter is he
managed?" "I have said already," said the Trifaldi, "that it is with a
peg, by turning which to one side or the other the knight who rides
him makes him go as he pleases, either through the upper air, or
skimming and almost sweeping the earth, or else in that middle course
that is sought and followed in all well-regulated proceedings." "I'd
like to see him," said Sancho; "but to fancy I'm going to mount him,
either in the saddle or on the croup, is to ask pears of the elm tree.
A good joke indeed! I can hardly keep my seat upon Dapple, and on a
pack-saddle softer than silk itself, and here they'd have me hold on
upon haunches of plank without pad or cushion of any sort! Gad, I have
no notion of bruising myself to get rid of anyone's beard; let each
one shave himself as best he can; I'm not going to accompany my master
on any such long journey; besides, I can't give any help to the
shaving of these beards as I can to the disenchantment of my lady
Dulcinea." "Yes, you can, my friend," replied the Trifaldi; "and so
much, that without you, so I understand, we shall be able to do
nothing." "In the king's name!" exclaimed Sancho, "what have squires
got to do with the adventures of their masters? Are they to have the
fame of such as they go through, and we the labour? Body o' me! if the
historians would only say, 'Such and such a knight finished such and
such an adventure, but with the help of so and so, his squire, without
which it would have been impossible for him to accomplish it;' but
they write curtly, "Don Paralipomenon of the Three Stars accomplished
the adventure of the six monsters;' without mentioning such a person
as his squire, who was there all the time, just as if there was no
such being. Once more, sirs, I say my master may go alone, and much
good may it do him; and if, as when I was mad I had a share in giving
him the government of an island, so, now that I am in my senses, I
could give him that of a kingdom, it should be his, for the simplicity
of his character and the fidelity of his conduct deserve it." And
then, turning to Sancho, he said, "Forgive me, my friend, that I led
thee to seem as mad as myself, making thee fall into the same error I
myself fell into, that there were and still are knights-errant in the
world." "Ah!" said Sancho weeping, "don't die, master, but take my
advice and live many years; for the foolishest thing a man can do in
this life is to let himself die without rhyme or reason, without
anybody killing him, or any hands but melancholy's making an end of
him. Come, don't be lazy, but get up from your bed and let us take to
the fields in shepherd's trim as we agreed. Perhaps behind some bush
we shall find the lady Dulcinea disenchanted, as fine as fine can be.
If it be that you are dying of vexation at having been vanquished, lay
the blame on me, and say you were overthrown because I had girthed
Rocinante badly; besides you must have seen in your books of chivalry
that it is a common thing for knights to upset one another, and for
him who is conquered to-day to be conqueror tomorrow." "Very true,"
said Samson, "and good Sancho Panza's view of these cases is quite
right." "Sirs, not so fast," said Don Quixote, "'in last year's nests
there are no birds this year.' I was mad, now I am in my senses; I was
Don Quixote of La Mancha, I am the Knight of the White Moon, whose
unheard-of achievements will perhaps have recalled him to thy memory.
I come to do battle with thee and prove the might of thy arm, to the
end that I make thee acknowledge and confess that my lady, let her be
who she may, is incomparably fairer than thy Dulcinea del Toboso. If
thou dost acknowledge this fairly and openly, thou shalt escape death
and save me the trouble of inflicting it upon thee; if thou fightest
and I vanquish thee, I demand no other satisfaction than that, laying
aside arms and abstaining from going in quest of adventures, thou
withdraw and betake thyself to thine own village for the space of a
year, and live there without putting hand to sword, in peace and quiet
and beneficial repose, the same being needful for the increase of thy
substance and the salvation of thy soul; and if thou dost vanquish me,
my head shall be at thy disposal, my arms and horse thy spoils, and
the renown of my deeds transferred and added to thine. Consider which
will be thy best course, and give me thy answer speedily, for this day
is all the time I have for the despatch of this business." Don Quixote
was amazed and astonished, as well at the Knight of the White Moon's
arrogance, as at his reason for delivering the defiance, and with calm
dignity he answered him, "Knight of the White Moon, of whose
achievements I have never heard until now, I will venture to swear you
have never seen the illustrious Dulcinea; for had you seen her I know
you would have taken care not to venture yourself upon this issue,
because the sight would have removed all doubt from your mind that
there ever has been or can be a beauty to be compared with hers; and
so, not saying you lie, but merely that you are not correct in what
you state, I accept your challenge, with the conditions you have
proposed, and at once, that the day you have fixed may not expire; and
from your conditions I except only that of the renown of your
achievements being transferred to me, for I know not of what sort they
are nor what they may amount to; I am satisfied with my own, such as
they be. Take, therefore, the side of the field you choose, and I will
do the same; and to whom God shall give it may Saint Peter add his
blessing." The Knight of the White Moon had been seen from the city,
and it was told the viceroy how he was in conversation with Don
Quixote. The viceroy, fancying it must be some fresh adventure got up
by Don Antonio Moreno or some other gentleman of the city, hurried out
at once to the beach accompanied by Don Antonio and several other
gentlemen, just as Don Quixote was wheeling Rocinante round in order
to take up the necessary distance. The viceroy upon this, seeing that
the pair of them were evidently preparing to come to the charge, put
himself between them, asking them what it was that led them to engage
in combat all of a sudden in this way. The Knight of the White Moon
replied that it was a question of precedence of beauty; and briefly
told him what he had said to Don Quixote, and how the conditions of
the defiance agreed upon on both sides had been accepted. The viceroy
went over to Don Antonio, and asked in a low voice did he know who the
Knight of the White Moon was, or was it some joke they were playing on
Don Quixote. Don Antonio replied that he neither knew who he was nor
whether the defiance was in joke or in earnest. This answer left the
viceroy in a state of perplexity, not knowing whether he ought to let
the combat go on or not; but unable to persuade himself that it was
anything but a joke he fell back, saying, "If there be no other way
out of it, gallant knights, except to confess or die, and Don Quixote
is inflexible, and your worship of the White Moon still more so, in
God's hand be it, and fall on." He of the White Moon thanked the
viceroy in courteous and well-chosen words for the permission he gave
them, and so did Don Quixote, who then, commending himself with all
his heart to God our Lord and to the lady Dulcinea del Toboso, stood
waiting for them to give the necessary signal for the onset. Our
lacquey, however, was thinking of something very different; he only
thought of what I am now going to mention. It seems that as he stood
contemplating his enemy she struck him as the most beautiful woman he
had ever seen all his life; and the little blind boy whom in our
streets they commonly call Love had no mind to let slip the chance of
triumphing over a lacquey heart, and adding it to the list of his
trophies; and so, stealing gently upon him unseen, he drove a dart two
yards long into the poor lacquey's left side and pierced his heart
through and through; which he was able to do quite at his ease, for
Love is invisible, and comes in and goes out as he likes, without
anyone calling him to account for what he does. Well then, when they
gave the signal for the onset our lacquey was in an ecstasy, musing
upon the beauty of her whom he had already made mistress of his
liberty, and so he paid no attention to the sound of the trumpet,
unlike Don Quixote, who was off the instant he heard it, and, at the
highest speed Rocinante was capable of, set out to meet his enemy, his
good squire Sancho shouting lustily as he saw him start, "God guide
thee, cream and flower of knights-errant! God give thee the victory,
for thou hast the right on thy side!" But though Tosilos saw Don
Quixote coming at him he never stirred a step from the spot where he
was posted; and instead of doing so called loudly to the marshal of
the field, to whom when he came up to see what he wanted he said,
"Senor, is not this battle to decide whether I marry or do not marry
that lady?" "Just so," was the answer. "Well then," said the lacquey,
"I feel qualms of conscience, and I should lay a-heavy burden upon it
if I were to proceed any further with the combat; I therefore declare
that I yield myself vanquished, and that I am willing to marry the
lady at once." The marshal of the field was lost in astonishment at
the words of Tosilos; and as he was one of those who were privy to the
arrangement of the affair he knew not what to say in reply. Don
Quixote pulled up in mid career when he saw that his enemy was not
coming on to the attack. The duke could not make out the reason why
the battle did not go on; but the marshal of the field hastened to him
to let him know what Tosilos said, and he was amazed and extremely
angry at it. In the meantime Tosilos advanced to where Dona Rodriguez
sat and said in a loud voice, "Senora, I am willing to marry your
daughter, and I have no wish to obtain by strife and fighting what I
can obtain in peace and without any risk to my life." The valiant Don
Quixote heard him, and said, "As that is the case I am released and
absolved from my promise; let them marry by all means, and as 'God our
Lord has given her, may Saint Peter add his blessing.'" The duke had
now descended to the courtyard of the castle, and going up to Tosilos
he said to him, "Is it true, sir knight, that you yield yourself
vanquished, and that moved by scruples of conscience you wish to marry
this damsel?" "It is, senor," replied Tosilos. "And he does well,"
said Sancho, "for what thou hast to give to the mouse, give to the
cat, and it will save thee all trouble." Tosilos meanwhile was trying
to unlace his helmet, and he begged them to come to his help at once,
as his power of breathing was failing him, and he could not remain so
long shut up in that confined space. They removed it in all haste, and
his lacquey features were revealed to public gaze. At this sight Dona
Rodriguez and her daughter raised a mighty outcry, exclaiming, "This
is a trick! This is a trick! They have put Tosilos, my lord the duke's
lacquey, upon us in place of the real husband. The justice of God and
the king against such trickery, not to say roguery!" "Do not distress
yourselves, ladies," said Don Quixote; "for this is no trickery or
roguery; or if it is, it is not the duke who is at the bottom of it,
but those wicked enchanters who persecute me, and who, jealous of my
reaping the glory of this victory, have turned your husband's features
into those of this person, who you say is a lacquey of the duke's;
take my advice, and notwithstanding the malice of my enemies marry
him, for beyond a doubt he is the one you wish for a husband." When
the duke heard this all his anger was near vanishing in a fit of
laughter, and he said, "The things that happen to Senor Don Quixote
are so extraordinary that I am ready to believe this lacquey of mine
is not one; but let us adopt this plan and device; let us put off the
marriage for, say, a fortnight, and let us keep this person about whom
we are uncertain in close confinement, and perhaps in the course of
that time he may return to his original shape; for the spite which the
enchanters entertain against Senor Don Quixote cannot last so long,
especially as it is of so little advantage to them to practise these
deceptions and transformations." "Oh, senor," said Sancho, "those
scoundrels are well used to changing whatever concerns my master from
one thing into another. A knight that he overcame some time back,
called the Knight of the Mirrors, they turned into the shape of the
bachelor Samson Carrasco of our town and a great friend of ours; and
my lady Dulcinea del Toboso they have turned into a common country
wench; so I suspect this lacquey will have to live and die a lacquey
all the days of his life." Here the Rodriguez's daughter exclaimed,
"Let him be who he may, this man that claims me for a wife; I am
thankful to him for the same, for I had rather be the lawful wife of a
lacquey than the cheated mistress of a gentleman; though he who played
me false is nothing of the kind." To be brief, all the talk and all
that had happened ended in Tosilos being shut up until it was seen how
his transformation turned out. All hailed Don Quixote as victor, but
the greater number were vexed and disappointed at finding that the
combatants they had been so anxiously waiting for had not battered one
another to pieces, just as the boys are disappointed when the man they
are waiting to see hanged does not come out, because the prosecution
or the court has pardoned him. The people dispersed, the duke and Don
Quixote returned to the castle, they locked up Tosilos, Dona Rodriguez
and her daughter remained perfectly contented when they saw that any
way the affair must end in marriage, and Tosilos wanted nothing else.
CHAPTER LVII. WHICH TREATS OF HOW DON QUIXOTE TOOK LEAVE OF THE DUKE,
AND OF WHAT FOLLOWED WITH THE WITTY AND IMPUDENT ALTISIDORA, ONE OF
THE DUCHESS'S DAMSELS Don Quixote now felt it right to quit a life of
such idleness as he was leading in the castle; for he fancied that he
was making himself sorely missed by suffering himself to remain shut
up and inactive amid the countless luxuries and enjoyments his hosts
lavished upon him as a knight, and he felt too that he would have to
render a strict account to heaven of that indolence and seclusion; and
so one day he asked the duke and duchess to grant him permission to
take his departure. They gave it, showing at the same time that they
were very sorry he was leaving them. The duchess gave his wife's
letters to Sancho Panza, who shed tears over them, saying, "Who would
have thought that such grand hopes as the news of my government bred
in my wife Teresa Panza's breast would end in my going back now to the
vagabond adventures of my master Don Quixote of La Mancha? Still I'm
glad to see my Teresa behaved as she ought in sending the acorns, for
if she had not sent them I'd have been sorry, and she'd have shown
herself ungrateful. It is a comfort to me that they can't call that
present a bribe; for I had got the government already when she sent
them, and it's but reasonable that those who have had a good turn done
them should show their gratitude, if it's only with a trifle. After
all I went into the government naked, and I come out of it naked; so I
can say with a safe conscience--and that's no small matter--'naked I
was born, naked I find myself, I neither lose nor gain; nay, while I
see myself put into a book and passed on from hand to hand over the
world, I don't care a fig, let them say what they like of me." "That,
Sancho," returned Don Quixote, "reminds me of what happened to a
famous poet of our own day, who, having written a bitter satire
against all the courtesan ladies, did not insert or name in it a
certain lady of whom it was questionable whether she was one or not.
She, seeing she was not in the list of the poet, asked him what he had
seen in her that he did not include her in the number of the others,
telling him he must add to his satire and put her in the new part, or
else look out for the consequences. The poet did as she bade him, and
left her without a shred of reputation, and she was satisfied by
getting fame though it was infamy. In keeping with this is what they
relate of that shepherd who set fire to the famous temple of Diana, by
repute one of the seven wonders of the world; but none of these tombs,
or of the many others of the heathens, were ornamented with
winding-sheets or any of those other offerings and tokens that show
that they who are buried there are saints." "That's the point I'm
coming to," said Sancho; "and now tell me, which is the greater work,
to bring a dead man to life or to kill a giant?" "The answer is easy,"
replied Don Quixote; "it is a greater work to bring to life a dead
man." "Now I have got you," said Sancho; "in that case the fame of
them who bring the dead to life, who give sight to the blind, cure
cripples, restore health to the sick, and before whose tombs there are
lamps burning, and whose chapels are filled with devout folk on their
knees adoring their relics be a better fame in this life and in the
other than that which all the heathen emperors and knights-errant that
have ever been in the world have left or may leave behind them?" "That
I grant, too," said Don Quixote. "Then this fame, these favours, these
privileges, or whatever you call it," said Sancho, "belong to the
bodies and relics of the saints who, with the approbation and
permission of our holy mother Church, have lamps, tapers,
winding-sheets, crutches, pictures, eyes and legs, by means of which
they increase devotion and add to their own Christian reputation.
Kings carry the bodies or relics of saints on their shoulders, and
kiss bits of their bones, and enrich and adorn their oratories and
favourite altars with them." "What wouldst thou have me infer from all
thou hast said, Sancho?" asked Don Quixote. "My meaning is," said
Sancho, "let us set about becoming saints, and we shall obtain more
quickly the fair fame we are striving after; for you know, senor,
yesterday or the day before yesterday (for it is so lately one may say
so) they canonised and beatified two little barefoot friars, and it is
now reckoned the greatest good luck to kiss or touch the iron chains
with which they girt and tortured their bodies, and they are held in
greater veneration, so it is said, than the sword of Roland in the
armoury of our lord the King, whom God preserve. So that, senor, it is
better to be an humble little friar of no matter what order, than a
valiant knight-errant; with God a couple of dozen of penance lashings
are of more avail than two thousand lance-thrusts, be they given to
giants, or monsters, or dragons." "All that is true," returned Don
Quixote, "but we cannot all be friars, and many are the ways by which
God takes his own to heaven; chivalry is a religion, there are sainted
knights in glory." "Yes," said Sancho, "but I have heard say that
there are more friars in heaven than knights-errant." "That," said Don
Quixote, "is because those in religious orders are more numerous than
knights." "The errants are many," said Sancho. "Many," replied Don
Quixote, "but few they who deserve the name of knights." With these,
and other discussions of the same sort, they passed that night and the
following day, without anything worth mention happening to them,
whereat Don Quixote was not a little dejected; but at length the next
day, at daybreak, they descried the great city of El Toboso, at the
sight of which Don Quixote's spirits rose and Sancho's fell, for he
did not know Dulcinea's house, nor in all his life had he ever seen
her, any more than his master; so that they were both uneasy, the one
to see her, the other at not having seen her, and Sancho was at a loss
to know what he was to do when his master sent him to El Toboso. In
the end, Don Quixote made up his mind to enter the city at nightfall,
and they waited until the time came among some oak trees that were
near El Toboso; and when the moment they had agreed upon arrived, they
made their entrance into the city, where something happened them that
may fairly be called something. CHAPTER IX. WHEREIN IS RELATED WHAT
WILL BE SEEN THERE CHAPTER X WHEREIN IS RELATED THE CRAFTY DEVICE
SANCHO ADOPTED TO ENCHANT THE LADY DULCINEA, AND OTHER INCIDENTS AS
LUDICROUS AS THEY ARE TRUE When the author of this great history comes
to relate what is set down in this chapter he says he would have
preferred to pass it over in silence, fearing it would not be
believed, because here Don Quixote's madness reaches the confines of
the greatest that can be conceived, and even goes a couple of bowshots
beyond the greatest. But after all, though still under the same fear
and apprehension, he has recorded it without adding to the story or
leaving out a particle of the truth, and entirely disregarding the
charges of falsehood that might be brought against him; and he was
right, for the truth may run fine but will not break, and always rises
above falsehood as oil above water; and so, going on with his story,
he says that as soon as Don Quixote had ensconced himself in the
forest, oak grove, or wood near El Toboso, he bade Sancho return to
the city, and not come into his presence again without having first
spoken on his behalf to his lady, and begged of her that it might be
her good pleasure to permit herself to be seen by her enslaved knight,
and deign to bestow her blessing upon him, so that he might thereby
hope for a happy issue in all his encounters and difficult
enterprises. Sancho undertook to execute the task according to the
instructions, and to bring back an answer as good as the one he
brought back before. "Go, my son," said Don Quixote, "and be not dazed
when thou findest thyself exposed to the light of that sun of beauty
thou art going to seek. Happy thou, above all the squires in the
world! Bear in mind, and let it not escape thy memory, how she
receives thee; if she changes colour while thou art giving her my
message; if she is agitated and disturbed at hearing my name; if she
cannot rest upon her cushion, shouldst thou haply find her seated in
the sumptuous state chamber proper to her rank; and should she be
standing, observe if she poises herself now on one foot, now on the
other; if she repeats two or three times the reply she gives thee; if
she passes from gentleness to austerity, from asperity to tenderness;
if she raises her hand to smooth her hair though it be not
disarranged. In short, my son, observe all her actions and motions,
for if thou wilt report them to me as they were, I will gather what
she hides in the recesses of her heart as regards my love; for I would
have thee know, Sancho, that the famous Amadis of Gaul was one of the
most perfect knights-errant--I am wrong to say he was one; he stood
alone, the first, the only one, the lord of all that were in the world
in his time. A fig for Don Belianis, and for all who say he equalled
him in any respect, for, my oath upon it, they are deceiving
themselves! I say, too, that when a painter desires to become famous
in his art he endeavours to copy the originals of the rarest painters
that he knows; and the same rule holds good for all the most important
crafts and callings that serve to adorn a state; thus must he who
would be esteemed prudent and patient imitate Ulysses, in whose person
and labours Homer presents to us a lively picture of prudence and
patience; as Virgil, too, shows us in the person of AEneas the virtue
of a pious son and the sagacity of a brave and skilful captain; not
representing or describing them as they were, but as they ought to be,
so as to leave the example of their virtues to posterity. In the same
way Amadis was the polestar, day-star, sun of valiant and devoted
knights, whom all we who fight under the banner of love and chivalry
are bound to imitate. This, then, being so, I consider, friend Sancho,
that the knight-errant who shall imitate him most closely will come
nearest to reaching the perfection of chivalry. Now one of the
instances in which this knight most conspicuously showed his prudence,
worth, valour, endurance, fortitude, and love, was when he withdrew,
rejected by the Lady Oriana, to do penance upon the Pena Pobre,
changing his name into that of Beltenebros, a name assuredly
significant and appropriate to the life which he had voluntarily
adopted. So, as it is easier for me to imitate him in this than in
cleaving giants asunder, cutting off serpents' heads, slaying dragons,
routing armies, destroying fleets, and breaking enchantments, and as
this place is so well suited for a similar purpose, I must not allow
the opportunity to escape which now so conveniently offers me its
forelock." "What is it in reality," said Sancho, "that your worship
means to do in such an out-of-the-way place as this?" "Have I not told
thee," answered Don Quixote, "that I mean to imitate Amadis here,
playing the victim of despair, the madman, the maniac, so as at the
same time to imitate the valiant Don Roland, when at the fountain he
had evidence of the fair Angelica having disgraced herself with Medoro
and through grief thereat went mad, and plucked up trees, troubled the
waters of the clear springs, slew destroyed flocks, burned down huts,
levelled houses, dragged mares after him, and perpetrated a hundred
thousand other outrages worthy of everlasting renown and record? And
though I have no intention of imitating Roland, or Orlando, or
Rotolando (for he went by all these names), step by step in all the
mad things he did, said, and thought, I will make a rough copy to the
best of my power of all that seems to me most essential; but perhaps I
shall content myself with the simple imitation of Amadis, who without
giving way to any mischievous madness but merely to tears and sorrow,
gained as much fame as the most famous." "It seems to me," said
Sancho, "that the knights who behaved in this way had provocation and
cause for those follies and penances; but what cause has your worship
for going mad? What lady has rejected you, or what evidence have you
found to prove that the lady Dulcinea del Toboso has been trifling
with Moor or Christian?" "There is the point," replied Don Quixote,
"and that is the beauty of this business of mine; no thanks to a
knight-errant for going mad when he has cause; the thing is to turn
crazy without any provocation, and let my lady know, if I do this in
the dry, what I would do in the moist; moreover I have abundant cause
in the long separation I have endured from my lady till death,
Dulcinea del Toboso; for as thou didst hear that shepherd Ambrosio say
the other day, in absence all ills are felt and feared; and so, friend
Sancho, waste no time in advising me against so rare, so happy, and so
unheard-of an imitation; mad I am, and mad I must be until thou
returnest with the answer to a letter that I mean to send by thee to
my lady Dulcinea; and if it be such as my constancy deserves, my
insanity and penance will come to an end; and if it be to the opposite
effect, I shall become mad in earnest, and, being so, I shall suffer
no more; thus in whatever way she may answer I shall escape from the
struggle and affliction in which thou wilt leave me, enjoying in my
senses the boon thou bearest me, or as a madman not feeling the evil
thou bringest me. But tell me, Sancho, hast thou got Mambrino's helmet
safe? for I saw thee take it up from the ground when that ungrateful
wretch tried to break it in pieces but could not, by which the
fineness of its temper may be seen." To which Sancho made answer, "By
the living God, Sir Knight of the Rueful Countenance, I say you not
only may and ought to do mad freaks for her sake, but you have a good
right to give way to despair and hang yourself; and no one who knows
of it but will say you did well, though the devil should take you; and
I wish I were on my road already, simply to see her, for it is many a
day since I saw her, and she must be altered by this time, for going
about the fields always, and the sun and the air spoil women's looks
greatly. But I must own the truth to your worship, Senor Don Quixote;
until now I have been under a great mistake, for I believed truly and
honestly that the lady Dulcinea must be some princess your worship was
in love with, or some person great enough to deserve the rich presents
you have sent her, such as the Biscayan and the galley slaves, and
many more no doubt, for your worship must have won many victories in
the time when I was not yet your squire. But all things considered,
what good can it do the lady Aldonza Lorenzo, I mean the lady Dulcinea
del Toboso, nor took Don Quixote's letter to her, for it was left in
the memorandum book in the Sierra Morena, how did he dare to invent
the answer and all that about finding her sifting wheat, the whole
story being a deception and falsehood, and so much to the prejudice of
the Empresses and Queens of the Alcarria and Estremadura, your worship
will be pleased to show us some portrait of this lady, though it be no
bigger than a grain of wheat; for by the thread one gets at the ball,
and in this way we shall be satisfied and easy, and you will be
content and pleased; nay, I believe we are already so far agreed with
you that even though her portrait should show her blind of one eye,
and distilling vermilion and sulphur from the other, we would
nevertheless, to gratify your worship, say all in her favour that you
desire." "She distils nothing of the kind, vile rabble," said Don
Quixote, burning with rage, "nothing of the kind, I say, only
ambergris and civet in cotton; nor is she one-eyed or humpbacked, but
straighter than a Guadarrama spindle: but ye must pay for the
blasphemy ye have uttered against beauty like that of my lady." And so
saying, he charged with levelled lance against the one who had spoken,
with such fury and fierceness that, if luck had not contrived that
Rocinante should stumble midway and come down, it would have gone hard
with the rash trader. Down went Rocinante, and over went his master,
rolling along the ground for some distance; and when he tried to rise
he was unable, so encumbered was he with lance, buckler, spurs,
helmet, and the weight of his old armour; and all the while he was
struggling to get up he kept saying, "Fly not, cowards and caitiffs!
stay, for not by my fault, but my horse's, am I stretched here." One
of the muleteers in attendance, who could not have had much good
nature in him, hearing the poor prostrate man blustering in this
style, was unable to refrain from giving him an answer on his ribs;
and coming up to him he seized his lance, and having broken it in
pieces, with one of them he began so to belabour our Don Quixote that,
notwithstanding and in spite of his armour, he milled him like a
measure of wheat. His masters called out not to lay on so hard and to
leave him alone, but the muleteers blood was up, and he did not care
to drop the game until he had vented the rest of his wrath, and
gathering up the remaining fragments of the lance he finished with a
discharge upon the unhappy victim, who all through the storm of sticks
that rained on him never ceased threatening heaven, and earth, and the
brigands, for such they seemed to him. At last the muleteer was tired,
and the traders continued their journey, taking with them matter for
talk about the poor fellow who had been cudgelled. He when he found
himself alone made another effort to rise; but if he was unable when
whole and sound, how was he to rise after having been thrashed and
well-nigh knocked to pieces? And yet he esteemed himself fortunate, as
it seemed to him that this was a regular knight-errant's mishap, and
entirely, he considered, the fault of his horse. However, battered in
body as he was, to rise was beyond his power. CHAPTER V. IN WHICH THE
NARRATIVE OF OUR KNIGHT'S MISHAP IS CONTINUED Finding, then, that, in
fact he could not move, he thought himself of having recourse to his
usual remedy, which was to think of some passage in his books, and his
craze brought to his mind that about Baldwin and the Marquis of
Mantua, when Carloto left him wounded on the mountain side, a story
known by heart by the children, not forgotten by the young men, and
lauded and even believed by the old folk; and for all that not a whit
truer than the miracles of Mahomet. This seemed to him to fit exactly
the case in which he found himself, so, making a show of severe
suffering, he began to roll on the ground and with feeble breath
repeat the very words which the wounded knight of the wood is said to
have uttered: Where art thou, lady mine, that thou My sorrow dost not
rue? Thou canst not know it, lady mine, Or else thou art untrue. And
so he went on with the ballad as far as the lines: O noble Marquis of
Mantua, My Uncle and liege lord! As chance would have it, when he had
got to this line there happened to come by a peasant from his own
village, a neighbour of his, who had been with a load of wheat to the
mill, and he, seeing the man stretched there, came up to him and asked
him who he was and what was the matter with him that he complained so
dolefully. Don Quixote was firmly persuaded that this was the Marquis
of Mantua, his uncle, so the only answer he made was to go on with his
ballad, in which he told the tale of his misfortune, and of the loves
of the Emperor's son and his wife all exactly as the ballad sings it.
The peasant stood amazed at hearing such nonsense, and relieving him
of the visor, already battered to pieces by blows, he wiped his face,
which was covered with dust, and as soon as he had done so he
recognised him and said, "Senor Quixada" (for so he appears to have
been called when he was in his senses and had not yet changed from a
quiet country gentleman into a knight-errant), "who has brought your
worship to this pass?" But to all questions the other only went on
with his ballad. Seeing this, the good man removed as well as he could
his breastplate and backpiece to see if he had any wound, but he could
perceive no blood nor any mark whatever. He then contrived to raise
him from the ground, and with no little difficulty hoisted him upon
his ass, which seemed to him to be the easiest mount for him; and
collecting the arms, even to the splinters of the lance, he tied them
on Rocinante, and leading him by the bridle and the ass by the halter
he took the road for the village, very sad to hear what absurd stuff
Don Quixote was talking. Nor was Don Quixote less so, for what with
blows and bruises he could not sit upright on the ass, and from time
to time he sent up sighs to heaven, so that once more he drove the
peasant to ask what ailed him. And it could have been only the devil
himself that put into his head tales to match his own adventures, for
now, forgetting Baldwin, he bethought himself of the Moor Abindarraez,
when the Alcaide of Antequera, Rodrigo de Narvaez, took him prisoner
and carried him away to his castle; so that when the peasant again
asked him how he was and what ailed him, he gave him for reply the
same words and phrases that the captive Abindarraez gave to Rodrigo de
Narvaez, just as he had read the story in the "Diana" of Jorge de
Montemayor where it is written, applying it to his own case so aptly
that the peasant went along cursing his fate that he had to listen to
such a lot of nonsense; from which, however, he came to the conclusion
that his neighbour was mad, and so made all haste to reach the village
to escape the wearisomeness of this harangue of Don Quixote's; who, at
the end of it, said, "Senor Don Rodrigo de Narvaez, your worship must
know that this fair Xarifa I have mentioned is now the lovely Dulcinea
del Toboso, for whom I have done, am doing, and will do the most
famous deeds of chivalry that in this world have been seen, are to be
seen, or ever shall be seen." To this the peasant answered,
"Senor--sinner that I am!--cannot your worship see that I am not Don
Rodrigo de Narvaez nor the Marquis of Mantua, but Pedro Alonso your
neighbour, and that your worship is neither Baldwin nor Abindarraez,
but the worthy gentleman Senor Quixada?" "I know who I am," replied
Don Quixote, "and I know that I may be not only those I have named,
but all the Twelve Peers of France and even all the Nine Worthies,
since my achievements surpass all that they have done all together and
each of them on his own account." With this talk and more of the same
kind they reached the village just as night was beginning to fall, but
the peasant waited until it was a little later that the belaboured
gentleman might not be seen riding in such a miserable trim. When it
was what seemed to him the proper time he entered the village and went
to Don Quixote's house, which he found all in confusion, and there
were the curate and the village barber, who were great friends of Don
Quixote, and his housekeeper was saying to them in a loud voice, "What
does your worship think can have befallen my master, Senor Licentiate
Pero Perez?" for so the curate was called; "it is three days now since
anything has been seen of him, or the hack, or the buckler, lance, or
armour. Miserable me! I am certain of it, and it is as true as that I
was born to die, that these accursed books of chivalry he has, and has
got into the way of reading so constantly, have upset his reason; for
now I remember having often heard him saying to himself that he would
turn knight-errant and go all over the world in quest of adventures.
To the devil and Barabbas with such books, that have brought to ruin
in this way the finest understanding there was in all La Mancha!" The
niece said the same, and, more: "You must know, Master Nicholas"--for
that was the name of the barber--"it was often my uncle's way to stay
two days and nights together poring over these unholy books of
misventures, after which he would fling the book away and snatch up
his sword and fall to slashing the walls; and when he was tired out he
would say he had killed four giants like four towers; and the sweat
that flowed from him when he was weary he said was the blood of the
wounds he had received in battle; and then he would drink a great jug
of cold water and become calm and quiet, saying that this water was a
most precious potion which the sage Esquife, a great magician and
friend of his, had brought him. But I take all the blame upon myself
for never having told your worships of my uncle's vagaries, that you
might put a stop to them before things had come to this pass, and burn
all these accursed books--for he has a great number--that richly
deserve to be burned like heretics." "So say I too," said the curate,
"and by my faith to-morrow shall not pass without public judgment upon
them, and may they be condemned to the flames lest they lead those
that read to behave as my good friend seems to have behaved." All this
the peasant heard, and from it he understood at last what was the
matter with his neighbour, so he began calling aloud, "Open, your
worships, to Senor Baldwin and to Senor the Marquis of Mantua, who
comes badly wounded, and to Senor Abindarraez, the Moor, whom the
valiant Rodrigo de Narvaez, the Alcaide of Antequera, brings captive."
At these words they all hurried out, and when they recognised their
friend, master, and uncle, who had not yet dismounted from the ass
because he could not, they ran to embrace him. "Hold!" said he, "for I
am badly wounded through my horse's fault; carry me to bed, and if
possible send for the wise Urganda to cure and see to my wounds." "See
there! plague on it!" cried the housekeeper at this: "did not my heart
tell the truth as to which foot my master went lame of? To bed with
your worship at once, and we will contrive to cure you here without
fetching that Hurgada. A curse I say once more, and a hundred times
more, on those books of chivalry that have brought your worship to
such a pass." They carried him to bed at once, and after searching for
his wounds could find none, but he said they were all bruises from
having had a severe fall with his horse Rocinante when in combat with
ten giants, the biggest and the boldest to be found on earth. "So,
so!" said the curate, "are there giants in the dance? By the sign of
the Cross I will burn them to-morrow before the day over." They put a
host of questions to Don Quixote, but his only answer to all was--give
him something to eat, and leave him to sleep, for that was what he
needed most. They did so, and the curate questioned the peasant at
great length as to how he had found Don Quixote. He told him, and the
nonsense he had talked when found and on the way home, all which made
the licentiate the more eager to do what he did the next day, which
was to summon his friend the barber, Master Nicholas, and go with him
to Don Quixote's house. CHAPTER VI. OF THE DIVERTING AND IMPORTANT
SCRUTINY WHICH THE CURATE AND THE BARBER MADE IN THE LIBRARY OF OUR
INGENIOUS GENTLEMAN He was still sleeping; so the curate asked the
niece for the keys of the room where the books, the authors of all the
mischief, were, and right willingly she gave them. They all went in,
the housekeeper with them, and found more than a hundred volumes of
big books very well bound, and some other small ones. The moment the
housekeeper saw them she turned about and ran out of the room, and
came back immediately with a saucer of holy water and a sprinkler,
saying, "Here, your worship, senor licentiate, sprinkle this room;
don't leave any magician of the many there are in these books to
bewitch us in revenge for our design of banishing them from the
world." The simplicity of the housekeeper made the licentiate laugh,
and he directed the barber to give him the books one by one to see
what they were about, as there might be some to be found among them
that did not deserve the penalty of fire. "No," said the niece, "there
is no reason for showing mercy to any of them; they have every one of
them done mischief; better fling them out of the window into the court
and make a pile of them and set fire to them; or else carry them into
the yard, and there a bonfire can be made without the smoke giving any
annoyance." The housekeeper said the same, so eager were they both for
the slaughter of those innocents, but the curate would not agree to it
without first reading at any rate the titles. The first that Master
Nicholas put into his hand was "The four books of Amadis of Gaul."
"This seems a mysterious thing," said the curate, "for, as I have
heard say, this was the first book of chivalry printed in Spain, and
from this all the others derive their birth and origin; so it seems to
me that we ought inexorably to condemn it to the flames as the founder
of so vile a sect." "Nay, sir," said the barber, "I too, have heard
say that this is the best of all the books of this kind that have been
written, and so, as something singular in its line, it ought to be
pardoned." "True," said the curate; "and for that reason those who
have hitherto written books of the sort deserve all the more censure
for writing without paying any attention to good taste or the rules of
art, by which they might guide themselves and become as famous in
prose as the two princes of Greek and Latin poetry are in verse." "I
myself, at any rate," said the canon, "was once tempted to write a
book of chivalry in which all the points I have mentioned were to be
observed; and if I must own the truth I have more than a hundred
sheets written; and to try if it came up to my own opinion of it, I
showed them to persons who were fond of this kind of reading, to
learned and intelligent men as well as to ignorant people who cared
for nothing but the pleasure of listening to nonsense, and from all I
obtained flattering approval; nevertheless I proceeded no farther with
it, as well because it seemed to me an occupation inconsistent with my
profession, as because I perceived that the fools are more numerous
than the wise; and, though it is better to be praised by the wise few
than applauded by the foolish many, I have no mind to submit myself to
the stupid judgment of the silly public, to whom the reading of such
books falls for the most part. "But what most of all made me hold my
hand and even abandon all idea of finishing it was an argument I put
to myself taken from the plays that are acted now-a-days, which was in
this wise: if those that are now in vogue, as well those that are pure
invention as those founded on history, are, all or most of them,
downright nonsense and things that have neither head nor tail, and yet
the public listens to them with delight, and regards and cries them up
as perfection when they are so far from it; and if the authors who
write them, and the players who act them, say that this is what they
must be, for the public wants this and will have nothing else; and
that those that go by rule and work out a plot according to the laws
of art will only find some half-dozen intelligent people to understand
them, while all the rest remain blind to the merit of their
composition; and that for themselves it is better to get bread from
the many than praise from the few; then my book will fare the same
way, after I have burnt off my eyebrows in trying to observe the
principles I have spoken of, and I shall be 'the tailor of the
corner.' And though I have sometimes endeavoured to convince actors
that they are mistaken in this notion they have adopted, and that they
would attract more people, and get more credit, by producing plays in
accordance with the rules of art, than by absurd ones, they are so
thoroughly wedded to their own opinion that no argument or evidence
can wean them from it. "I remember saying one day to one of these
obstinate fellows, 'Tell me, do you not recollect that a few years
ago, there were three tragedies acted in Spain, written by a famous
poet of these kingdoms, which were such that they filled all who heard
them with admiration, delight, and interest, the ignorant as well as
the wise, the masses as well as the higher orders, and brought in more
money to the performers, these three alone, than thirty of the best
that have been since produced?' "'No doubt,' replied the actor in
question, 'you mean the "Isabella," the "Phyllis," and the
"Alexandra."' "'Those are the ones I mean,' said I; 'and see if they
did not observe the principles of art, and if, by observing them, they
failed to show their superiority and please all the world; so that the
fault does not lie with the public that insists upon nonsense, but
with those who don't know how to produce something else. "The
Ingratitude Revenged" was not nonsense, nor was there any in "The
Numantia," nor any to be found in "The Merchant Lover," nor yet in
"The Friendly Fair Foe," nor in some others that have been written by
certain gifted poets, to their own fame and renown, and to the profit
of those that brought them out;' some further remarks I added to
these, with which, I think, I left him rather dumbfoundered, but not
so satisfied or convinced that I could disabuse him of his error."
"You have touched upon a subject, senor canon," observed the curate
here, "that has awakened an old enmity I have against the plays in
vogue at the present day, quite as strong as that which I bear to the
books of chivalry; for while the drama, according to Tully, should be
the mirror of human life, the model of manners, and the image of the
truth, those which are presented now-a-days are mirrors of nonsense,
models of folly, and images of lewdness. For what greater nonsense can
there be in connection with what we are now discussing than for an
infant to appear in swaddling clothes in the first scene of the first
act, and in the second a grown-up bearded man? Or what greater
absurdity can there be than putting before us an old man as a
swashbuckler, a young man as a poltroon, a lackey using fine language,
a page giving sage advice, a king plying as a porter, a princess who
is a kitchen-maid? And then what shall I say of their attention to the
time in which the action they represent may or can take place, save
that I have seen a play where the first act began in Europe, the
second in Asia, the third finished in Africa, and no doubt, had it
been in four acts, the fourth would have ended in America, and so it
would have been laid in all four quarters of the globe? And if truth
to life is the main thing the drama should keep in view, how is it
possible for any average understanding to be satisfied when the action
is supposed to pass in the time of King Pepin or Charlemagne, and the
principal personage in it they represent to be the Emperor Heraclius
who entered Jerusalem with the cross and won the Holy Sepulchre, like
Godfrey of Bouillon, there being years innumerable between the one and
the other? or, if the play is based on fiction and historical facts
are introduced, or bits of what occurred to different people and at
different times mixed up with it, all, not only without any semblance
of probability, but with obvious errors that from every point of view
are inexcusable? And the worst of it is, there are ignorant people who
say that this is perfection, and that anything beyond this is affected
refinement. And then if we turn to sacred dramas--what miracles they
invent in them! What apocryphal, ill-devised incidents, attributing to
one saint the miracles of another! And even in secular plays they
venture to introduce miracles without any reason or object except that
they think some such miracle, or transformation as they call it, will
come in well to astonish stupid people and draw them to the play. All
this tends to the prejudice of the truth and the corruption of
history, nay more, to the reproach of the wits of Spain; for
foreigners who scrupulously observe the laws of the drama look upon us
as barbarous and ignorant, when they see the absurdity and nonsense of
the plays we produce. Nor will it be a sufficient excuse to say that
the chief object well-ordered governments have in view when they
permit plays to be performed in public is to entertain the people with
some harmless amusement occasionally, and keep it from those evil
humours which idleness is apt to engender; and that, as this may be
attained by any sort of play, good or bad, there is no need to lay
down laws, or bind those who write or act them to make them as they
ought to be made, since, as I say, the object sought for may be
secured by any sort. To this I would reply that the same end would be,
beyond all comparison, better attained by means of good plays than by
those that are not so; for after listening to an artistic and properly
constructed play, the hearer will come away enlivened by the jests,
instructed by the serious parts, full of admiration at the incidents,
his wits sharpened by the arguments, warned by the tricks, all the
wiser for the examples, inflamed against vice, and in love with
virtue; for in all these ways a good play will stimulate the mind of
the hearer be he ever so boorish or dull; and of all impossibilities
the greatest is that a play endowed with all these qualities will not
entertain, satisfy, and please much more than one wanting in them,
like the greater number of those which are commonly acted now-a-days.
Nor are the poets who write them to be blamed for this; for some there
are among them who are perfectly well aware of their faults, and know
what they ought to do; but as plays have become a salable commodity,
they say, and with truth, that the actors will not buy them unless
they are after this fashion; and so the poet tries to adapt himself to
the requirements of the actor who is to pay him for his work. And that
this is the truth may be seen by the countless plays that a most
fertile wit of these kingdoms has written, with so much brilliancy, so
much grace and gaiety, such polished versification, such choice
language, such profound reflections, and in a word, so rich in
eloquence and elevation of style, that he has filled the world with
his fame; and yet, in consequence of his desire to suit the taste of
the actors, they have not all, as some of them have, come as near
perfection as they ought. Others write plays with such heedlessness
that, after they have been acted, the actors have to fly and abscond,
afraid of being punished, as they often have been, for having acted
something offensive to some king or other, or insulting to some noble
family. All which evils, and many more that I say nothing of, would be
removed if there were some intelligent and sensible person at the
capital to examine all plays before they were acted, not only those
produced in the capital itself, but all that were intended to be acted
in Spain; without whose approval, seal, and signature, no local
magistracy should allow any play to be acted. In that case actors
would take care to send their plays to the capital, and could act them
in safety, and those who write them would be more careful and take
more pains with their work, standing in awe of having to submit it to
the strict examination of one who understood the matter; and so good
plays would be produced and the objects they aim at happily attained;
as well the amusement of the people, as the credit of the wits of
Spain, the interest and safety of the actors, and the saving of
trouble in inflicting punishment on them. And if the same or some
other person were authorised to examine the newly written books of
chivalry, no doubt some would appear with all the perfections you have
described, enriching our language with the gracious and precious
treasure of eloquence, and driving the old books into obscurity before
the light of the new ones that would come out for the harmless
entertainment, not merely of the idle but of the very busiest; for the
bow cannot be always bent, nor can weak human nature exist without
some lawful amusement." The canon and the curate had proceeded thus
far with their conversation, when the barber, coming forward, joined
them, and said to the curate, "This is the spot, senor licentiate,
that I said was a good one for fresh and plentiful pasture for the
oxen, while we take our noontide rest." "And so it seems," returned
the curate, and he told the canon what he proposed to do, on which he
too made up his mind to halt with them, attracted by the aspect of the
fair valley that lay before their eyes; and to enjoy it as well as the
conversation of the curate, to whom he had begun to take a fancy, and
also to learn more particulars about the doings of Don Quixote, he
desired some of his servants to go on to the inn, which was not far
distant, and fetch from it what eatables there might be for the whole
party, as he meant to rest for the afternoon where he was; to which
one of his servants replied that the sumpter mule, which by this time
ought to have reached the inn, carried provisions enough to make it
unnecessary to get anything from the inn except barley. "In that
case," said the canon, "take all the beasts there, and bring the
sumpter mule back." While this was going on, Sancho, perceiving that
he could speak to his master without having the curate and the barber,
of whom he had his suspicions, present all the time, approached the
cage in which Don Quixote was placed, and said, "Senor, to ease my
conscience I want to tell you the state of the case as to your
enchantment, and that is that these two here, with their faces
covered, are the curate of our village and the barber; and I suspect
they have hit upon this plan of carrying you off in this fashion, out
of pure envy because your worship surpasses them in doing famous
deeds; and if this be the truth it follows that you are not enchanted,
but hoodwinked and made a fool of. And to prove this I want to ask you
one thing; and if you answer me as I believe you will answer, you will
be able to lay your finger on the trick, and you will see that you are
not enchanted but gone wrong in your wits." "Ask what thou wilt,
Sancho my son," returned Don Quixote, "for I will satisfy thee and
answer all thou requirest. As to what thou sayest, that these who
accompany us yonder are the curate and the barber, our neighbours and
acquaintances, it is very possible that they may seem to be those same
persons; but that they are so in reality and in fact, believe it not
on any account; what thou art to believe and think is that, if they
look like them, as thou sayest, it must be that those who have
enchanted me have taken this shape and likeness; for it is easy for
enchanters to take any form they please, and they may have taken those
of our friends in order to make thee think as thou dost, and lead thee
into a labyrinth of fancies from which thou wilt find no escape though
thou hadst the cord of Theseus; and they may also have done it to make
me uncertain in my mind, and unable to conjecture whence this evil
comes to me; for if on the one hand thou dost tell me that the barber
and curate of our village are here in company with us, and on the
other I find myself shut up in a cage, and know in my heart that no
power on earth that was not supernatural would have been able to shut
me in, what wouldst thou have me say or think, but that my enchantment
is of a sort that transcends all I have ever read of in all the
histories that deal with knights-errant that have been enchanted? So
thou mayest set thy mind at rest as to the idea that they are what
thou sayest, for they are as much so as I am a Turk. But touching thy
desire to ask me something, say on, and I will answer thee, though
thou shouldst ask questions from this till to-morrow morning." "May
Our Lady be good to me!" said Sancho, lifting up his voice; "and is it
possible that your worship is so thick of skull and so short of brains
that you cannot see that what I say is the simple truth, and that
malice has more to do with your imprisonment and misfortune than
enchantment? But as it is so, I will prove plainly to you that you are
not enchanted. Now tell me, so may God deliver you from this
affliction, and so may you find yourself when you least expect it in
the arms of my lady Dulcinea-" "Leave off conjuring me," said Don
Quixote, "and ask what thou wouldst know; I have already told thee I
will answer with all possible precision." "That is what I want," said
Sancho; "and what I would know, and have you tell me, without adding
or leaving out anything, but telling the whole truth as one expects it
to be told, and as it is told, by all who profess arms, as your
worship professes them, under the title of knights-errant-" "I tell
thee I will not lie in any particular," said Don Quixote; "finish thy
question; for in truth thou weariest me with all these asseverations,
requirements, and precautions, Sancho." "Well, I rely on the goodness
and truth of my master," said Sancho; "and so, because it bears upon
what we are talking about, I would ask, speaking with all reverence,
whether since your worship has been shut up and, as you think,
enchanted in this cage, you have felt any desire or inclination to go
anywhere, as the saying is?" "I do not understand 'going anywhere,'"
said Don Quixote; "explain thyself more clearly, Sancho, if thou
wouldst have me give an answer to the point." "Is it possible," said
Sancho, "that your worship does not understand 'going anywhere'? Why,
the schoolboys know that from the time they were babes. Well then, you
must know I mean have you had any desire to do what cannot be
avoided?" "Ah! now I understand thee, Sancho," said Don Quixote; "yes,
often, and even this minute; get me out of this strait, or all will
not go right." CHAPTER XLIX. WHICH TREATS OF THE SHREWD CONVERSATION
WHICH SANCHO PANZA HELD WITH HIS MASTER DON QUIXOTE "Aha, I have
caught you," said Sancho; "this is what in my heart and soul I was
longing to know. Come now, senor, can you deny what is commonly said
around us, when a person is out of humour, 'I don't know what ails
so-and-so, that he neither eats, nor drinks, nor sleeps, nor gives a
proper answer to any question; one would think he was enchanted'? From
which it is to be gathered that those who do not eat, or drink, or
sleep, or do any of the natural acts I am speaking of-that such
persons are enchanted; but not those that have the desire your worship
has, and drink when drink is given them, and eat when there is
anything to eat, and answer every question that is asked them." "What
thou sayest is true, Sancho," replied Don Quixote; "but I have already
told thee there are many sorts of enchantments, and it may be that in
the course of time they have been changed one for another, and that
now it may be the way with enchanted people to do all that I do,
though they did not do so before; so it is vain to argue or draw
inferences against the usage of the time. I know and feel that I am
enchanted, and that is enough to ease my conscience; for it would
weigh heavily on it if I thought that I was not enchanted, and that in
a faint-hearted and cowardly way I allowed myself to lie in this cage,
defrauding multitudes of the succour I might afford to those in need
and distress, who at this very moment may be in sore want of my aid
and protection." "Still for all that," replied Sancho, "I say that,
for your greater and fuller satisfaction, it would be well if your
worship were to try to get out of this prison (and I promise to do all
in my power to help, and even to take you out of it), and see if you
could once more mount your good Rocinante, who seems to be enchanted
too, he is so melancholy and dejected; and then we might try our
chance in looking for adventures again; and if we have no luck there
will be time enough to go back to the cage; in which, on the faith of
a good and loyal squire, I promise to shut myself up along with your
worship, if so be you are so unfortunate, or I so stupid, as not to be
able to carry out my plan." "I am content to do as thou sayest,
brother Sancho," said Don Quixote, "and when thou seest an opportunity
for effecting my release I will obey thee absolutely; but thou wilt
see, Sancho, how mistaken thou art in thy conception of my
misfortune." The knight-errant and the ill-errant squire kept up their
conversation till they reached the place where the curate, the canon,
and the barber, who had already dismounted, were waiting for them. The
carter at once unyoked the oxen and left them to roam at large about
the pleasant green spot, the freshness of which seemed to invite, not
enchanted people like Don Quixote, but wide-awake, sensible folk like
his squire, who begged the curate to allow his master to leave the
cage for a little; for if they did not let him out, he protested he
would be unable to avoid offending their nostrils unless they kept
their distance. The canon took his hand, tied together as they both
were, and on his word and promise they unbound him, and rejoiced
beyond measure he was to find himself out of the cage. The first thing
he did was to clean up some armour that had belonged to his
great-grandfather, and had been for ages lying forgotten in a corner
eaten with rust and covered with mildew. He scoured and polished it as
best he could, but he perceived one great defect in it, that it had no
closed helmet, nothing but a simple morion. This deficiency, however,
his ingenuity supplied, for he contrived a kind of half-helmet of
pasteboard which, fitted on to the morion, looked like a whole one. It
is true that, in order to see if it was strong and fit to stand a cut,
he drew his sword and gave it a couple of slashes, the first of which
undid in an instant what had taken him a week to do. The ease with
which he had knocked it to pieces disconcerted him somewhat, and to
guard against that danger he set to work again, fixing bars of iron on
the inside until he was satisfied with its strength; and then, not
caring to try any more experiments with it, he passed it and adopted
it as a helmet of the most perfect construction. He next proceeded to
inspect his hack, which, with more quartos than a real and more
blemishes than the steed of Gonela, that "tantum pellis et ossa fuit,"
surpassed in his eyes the Bucephalus of Alexander or the Babieca of
the Cid. Four days were spent in thinking what name to give him,
because (as he said to himself) it was not right that a horse
belonging to a knight so famous, and one with such merits of his own,
should be without some distinctive name, and he strove to adapt it so
as to indicate what he had been before belonging to a knight-errant,
and what he then was; for it was only reasonable that, his master
taking a new character, he should take a new name, and that it should
be a distinguished and full-sounding one, befitting the new order and
calling he was about to follow. And so, after having composed, struck
out, rejected, added to, unmade, and remade a multitude of names out
of his memory and fancy, he decided upon calling him Rocinante, a
name, to his thinking, lofty, sonorous, and significant of his
condition as a hack before he became what he now was, the first and
foremost of all the hacks in the world. Having got a name for his
horse so much to his taste, he was anxious to get one for himself, and
he was eight days more pondering over this point, till at last he made
up his mind to call himself "Don Quixote," whence, as has been already
said, the authors of this veracious history have inferred that his
name must have been beyond a doubt Quixada, and not Quesada as others
would have it. Recollecting, however, that the valiant Amadis was not
content to call himself curtly Amadis and nothing more, but added the
name of his kingdom and country to make it famous, and called himself
Amadis of Gaul, he, like a good knight, resolved to add on the name of
his, and to style himself Don Quixote of La Mancha, whereby, he
considered, he described accurately his origin and country, and did
honour to it in taking his surname from it. So then, his armour being
furbished, his morion turned into a helmet, his hack christened, and
he himself confirmed, he came to the conclusion that nothing more was
needed now but to look out for a lady to be in love with; for a
knight-errant without love was like a tree without leaves or fruit, or
a body without a soul. As he said to himself, "If, for my sins, or by
my good fortune, I come across some giant hereabouts, a common
occurrence with knights-errant, and overthrow him in one onslaught, or
cleave him asunder to the waist, or, in short, vanquish and subdue
him, will it not be well to have some one I may send him to as a
present, that he may come in and fall on his knees before my sweet
lady, and in a humble, submissive voice say, 'I am the giant
Caraculiambro, lord of the island of Malindrania, vanquished in single
combat by the never sufficiently extolled knight Don Quixote of La
Mancha, who rights wrongs, gives food to those who thirst and drink to
the hungry. That's all very well, but do you know her house, Sancho?
My master says it will be some royal palace or grand castle. And have
you ever seen her by any chance? Neither I nor my master ever saw her.
And does it strike you that it would be just and right if the El
Toboso people, finding out that you were here with the intention of
going to tamper with their princesses and trouble their ladies, were
to come and cudgel your ribs, and not leave a whole bone in you? They
would, indeed, have very good reason, if they did not see that I am
under orders, and that 'you are a messenger, my friend, no blame
belongs to you.' Don't you trust to that, Sancho, for the Manchegan
folk are as hot-tempered as they are honest, and won't put up with
liberties from anybody. By the Lord, if they get scent of you, it will
be worse for you, I promise you. Be off, you scoundrel! Let the bolt
fall. Why should I go looking for three feet on a cat, to please
another man; and what is more, when looking for Dulcinea will be
looking for Marica in Ravena, or the bachelor in Salamanca? The devil,
the devil and nobody else, has mixed me up in this business!" Such was
the soliloquy Sancho held with himself, and all the conclusion he
could come to was to say to himself again, "Well, there's remedy for
everything except death, under whose yoke we have all to pass, whether
we like it or not, when life's finished. I have seen by a thousand
signs that this master of mine is a madman fit to be tied, and for
that matter, I too, am not behind him; for I'm a greater fool than he
is when I follow him and serve him, if there's any truth in the
proverb that says, 'Tell me what company thou keepest, and I'll tell
thee what thou art,' is to the point here," said Sancho; "your worship
keeps company with enchanted people that are always fasting and
watching; what wonder is it, then, that you neither eat nor sleep
while you are with them? But forgive me, senor, if I say that of all
this you have told us now, may God take me--I was just going to say
the devil--if I believe a single particle." "What!" said the cousin,
"has Senor Don Quixote, then, been lying? Why, even if he wished it he
has not had time to imagine and put together such a host of lies." "I
don't believe my master lies," said Sancho. "If not, what dost thou
believe?" asked Don Quixote. "I believe," replied Sancho, "that this
Merlin, or those enchanters who enchanted the whole crew your worship
says you saw and discoursed with down there, stuffed your imagination
or your mind with all this rigmarole you have been treating us to, and
all that is still to come." "All that might be, Sancho," replied Don
Quixote; "but it is not so, for everything that I have told you I saw
with my own eyes, and touched with my own hands. But what will you say
when I tell you now how, among the countless other marvellous things
Montesinos showed me (of which at leisure and at the proper time I
will give thee an account in the course of our journey, for they would
not be all in place here), he showed me three country girls who went
skipping and capering like goats over the pleasant fields there, and
the instant I beheld them I knew one to be the peerless Dulcinea del
Toboso, and the other two those same country girls that were with her
and that we spoke to on the road from El Toboso! I asked Montesinos if
he knew them, and he told me he did not, but he thought they must be
some enchanted ladies of distinction, for it was only a few days
before that they had made their appearance in those meadows; but I was
not to be surprised at that, because there were a great many other
ladies there of times past and present, enchanted in various strange
shapes, and among them he had recognised Queen Guinevere and her dame
Quintanona, she who poured out the wine for Lancelot when he came from
Britain." When Sancho Panza heard his master say this he was ready to
take leave of his senses, or die with laughter; for, as he knew the
real truth about the pretended enchantment of Dulcinea, in which he
himself had been the enchanter and concocter of all the evidence, he
made up his mind at last that, beyond all doubt, his master was out of
his wits and stark mad, so he said to him, "It was an evil hour, a
worse season, and a sorrowful day, when your worship, dear master
mine, went down to the other world, and an unlucky moment when you met
with Senor Montesinos, who has sent you back to us like this. You were
well enough here above in your full senses, such as God had given you,
delivering maxims and giving advice at every turn, and not as you are
now, talking the greatest nonsense that can be imagined." "As I know
thee, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "I heed not thy words." "Nor I your
worship's," said Sancho, "whether you beat me or kill me for those I
have spoken, and will speak if you don't correct and mend your own.
But tell me, while we are still at peace, how or by what did you
recognise the lady our mistress; and if you spoke to her, what did you
say, and what did she answer?" "I recognised her," said Don Quixote,
"by her wearing the same garments she wore when thou didst point her
out to me. I spoke to her, but she did not utter a word in reply; on
the contrary, she turned her back on me and took to flight, at such a
pace that crossbow bolt could not have overtaken her. I wished to
follow her, and would have done so had not Sancho interposed with his
smartness; for he, seeing his master pause, took the lead, saying, "My
lord Don Quixote of La Mancha, who once was called the Knight of the
Rueful Countenance, but now is called the Knight of the Lions, is a
gentleman of great discretion who knows Latin and his mother tongue
like a bachelor, and in everything that he deals with or advises
proceeds like a good soldier, and has all the laws and ordinances of
what they call combat at his fingers' ends; so you have nothing to do
but to let yourselves be guided by what he says, and on my head be it
if it is wrong. Besides which, you have been told that it is folly to
take offence at merely hearing a bray. I remember when I was a boy I
brayed as often as I had a fancy, without anyone hindering me, and so
elegantly and naturally that when I brayed all the asses in the town
would bray; but I was none the less for that the son of my parents who
were greatly respected; and though I was envied because of the gift by
more than one of the high and mighty ones of the town, I did not care
two farthings for it; and that you may see I am telling the truth,
wait a bit and listen, for this art, like swimming, once learnt is
never forgotten;" and then, taking hold of his nose, he began to bray
so vigorously that all the valleys around rang again. One of those,
however, that stood near him, fancying he was mocking them, lifted up
a long staff he had in his hand and smote him such a blow with it that
Sancho dropped helpless to the ground. Don Quixote, seeing him so
roughly handled, attacked the man who had struck him lance in hand,
but so many thrust themselves between them that he could not avenge
him. Far from it, finding a shower of stones rained upon him, and
crossbows and muskets unnumbered levelled at him, he wheeled Rocinante
round and, as fast as his best gallop could take him, fled from the
midst of them, commending himself to God with all his heart to deliver
him out of this peril, in dread every step of some ball coming in at
his back and coming out at his breast, and every minute drawing his
breath to see whether it had gone from him. The members of the band,
however, were satisfied with seeing him take to flight, and did not
fire on him. They put up Sancho, scarcely restored to his senses, on
his ass, and let him go after his master; not that he was sufficiently
in his wits to guide the beast, but Dapple followed the footsteps of
Rocinante, from whom he could not remain a moment separated. Don
Quixote having got some way off looked back, and seeing Sancho coming,
waited for him, as he perceived that no one followed him. The men of
the troop stood their ground till night, and as the enemy did not come
out to battle, they returned to their town exulting; and had they been
aware of the ancient custom of the Greeks, they would have erected a
trophy on the spot. CHAPTER XXVIII. OF MATTERS THAT BENENGELI SAYS HE
WHO READS THEM WILL KNOW, IF HE READS THEM WITH ATTENTION When the
brave man flees, treachery is manifest and it is for wise men to
reserve themselves for better occasions. This proved to be the case
with Don Quixote, who, giving way before the fury of the townsfolk and
the hostile intentions of the angry troop, took to flight and, without
a thought of Sancho or the danger in which he was leaving him,
retreated to such a distance as he thought made him safe. Sancho,
lying across his ass, followed him, as has been said, and at length
came up, having by this time recovered his senses, and on joining him
let himself drop off Dapple at Rocinante's feet, sore, bruised, and
belaboured. Don Quixote dismounted to examine his wounds, but finding
him whole from head to foot, he said to him, angrily enough, "In an
evil hour didst thou take to braying, Sancho! Where hast thou learned
that it is well done to mention the rope in the house of the man that
has been hanged? To the music of brays what harmonies couldst thou
expect to get but cudgels? Give thanks to God, Sancho, that they
signed the cross on thee just now with a stick, and did not mark thee
per signum crucis with a cutlass." "I'm not equal to answering," said
Sancho, "for I feel as if I was speaking through my shoulders; let us
mount and get away from this; I'll keep from braying, but not from
saying that knights-errant fly and leave their good squires to be
pounded like privet, or made meal of at the hands of their enemies."
"He does not fly who retires," returned Don Quixote; "for I would have
thee know, Sancho, that the valour which is not based upon a
foundation of prudence is called rashness, and the exploits of the
rash man are to be attributed rather to good fortune than to courage;
and so I own that I retired, but not that I fled; and therein I have
followed the example of many valiant men who have reserved themselves
for better times; the histories are full of instances of this, but as
it would not be any good to thee or pleasure to me, I will not recount
them to thee now." Sancho was by this time mounted with the help of
Don Quixote, who then himself mounted Rocinante, and at a leisurely
pace they proceeded to take shelter in a grove which was in sight
about a quarter of a league off. Every now and then Sancho gave vent
to deep sighs and dismal groans, and on Don Quixote asking him what
caused such acute suffering, he replied that, from the end of his
back-bone up to the nape of his neck, he was so sore that it nearly
drove him out of his senses. "The cause of that soreness," said Don
Quixote, "will be, no doubt, that the staff wherewith they smote thee
being a very long one, it caught thee all down the back, where all the
parts that are sore are situated, and had it reached any further thou
wouldst be sorer still." "By God," said Sancho, "your worship has
relieved me of a great doubt, and cleared up the point for me in
elegant style! Body o' me! is the cause of my soreness such a mystery
that there's any need to tell me I am sore everywhere the staff hit
me? If it was my ankles that pained me there might be something in
going divining why they did, but it is not much to divine that I'm
sore where they thrashed me. By my faith, master mine, the ills of
others hang by a hair; every day I am discovering more and more how
little I have to hope for from keeping company with your worship; for
if this time you have allowed me to be drubbed, the next time, or a
hundred times more, we'll have the blanketings of the other day over
again, and all the other pranks which, if they have fallen on my
shoulders now, will be thrown in my teeth by-and-by. I would do a
great deal better (if I was not an ignorant brute that will never do
any good all my life), I would do a great deal better, I say, to go
home to my wife and children and support them and bring them up on
what God may please to give me, instead of following your worship
along roads that lead nowhere and paths that are none at all, with
little to drink and less to eat. And then when it comes to sleeping!
Measure out seven feet on the earth, brother squire, and if that's not
enough for you, take as many more, for you may have it all your own
way and stretch yourself to your heart's content. Oh that I could see
burnt and turned to ashes the first man that meddled with
knight-errantry or at any rate the first who chose to be squire to
such fools as all the knights-errant of past times must have been! Of
those of the present day I say nothing, because, as your worship is
one of them, I respect them, and because I know your worship knows a
point more than the devil in all you say and think." "I would lay a
good wager with you, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "that now that you are
talking on without anyone to stop you, you don't feel a pain in your
whole body. Talk away, my son, say whatever comes into your head or
mouth, for so long as you feel no pain, the irritation your
impertinences give me will be a pleasure to me; and if you are so
anxious to go home to your wife and children, God forbid that I should
prevent you; you have money of mine; see how long it is since we left
our village this third time, and how much you can and ought to earn
every month, and pay yourself out of your own hand." "When I worked
for Tom Carrasco, the father of the bachelor Samson Carrasco that your
worship knows," replied Sancho, "I used to earn two ducats a month
besides my food; I can't tell what I can earn with your worship,
though I know a knight-errant's squire has harder times of it than he
who works for a farmer; for after all, we who work for farmers,
however much we toil all day, at the worst, at night, we have our olla
supper and sleep in a bed, which I have not slept in since I have been
in your worship's service, if it wasn't the short time we were in Don
Diego de Miranda's house, and the feast I had with the skimmings I
took off Camacho's pots, and what I ate, drank, and slept in Basilio's
house; all the rest of the time I have been sleeping on the hard
ground under the open sky, exposed to what they call the inclemencies
of heaven, keeping life in me with scraps of cheese and crusts of
bread, and drinking water either from the brooks or from the springs
we come to on these by-paths we travel." "I own, Sancho," said Don
Quixote, "that all thou sayest is true; how much, thinkest thou, ought
I to give thee over and above what Tom Carrasco gave thee?" "I think,"
said Sancho, "that if your worship was to add on two reals a month I'd
consider myself well paid; that is, as far as the wages of my labour
go; but to make up to me for your worship's pledge and promise to me
to give me the government of an island, it would be fair to add six
reals more, making thirty in all." "Very good," said Don Quixote; "it
is twenty-five days since we left our village, so reckon up, Sancho,
according to the wages you have made out for yourself, and see how
much I owe you in proportion, and pay yourself, as I said before, out
of your own hand." "O body o' me!" said Sancho, "but your worship is
very much out in that reckoning; for when it comes to the promise of
the island we must count from the day your worship promised it to me
to this present hour we are at now." "Well, how long is it, Sancho,
since I promised it to you?" said Don Quixote. "If I remember
rightly," said Sancho, "it must be over twenty years, three days more
or less." Don Quixote gave himself a great slap on the forehead and
began to laugh heartily, and said he, "Why, I have not been wandering,
either in the Sierra Morena or in the whole course of our sallies, but
barely two months, and thou sayest, Sancho, that it is twenty years
since I promised thee the island. I believe now thou wouldst have all
the money thou hast of mine go in thy wages. If so, and if that be thy
pleasure, I give it to thee now, once and for all, and much good may
it do thee, for so long as I see myself rid of such a good-for-nothing
squire I'll be glad to be left a pauper without a rap. But tell me,
thou perverter of the squirely rules of knight-errantry, where hast
thou ever seen or read that any knight-errant's squire made terms with
his lord, 'you must give me so much a month for serving you'? Plunge,
scoundrel, rogue, monster--for such I take thee to be--plunge, I say,
into the mare magnum of their histories; and if thou shalt find that
any squire ever said or thought what thou hast said now, I will let
thee nail it on my forehead, and give me, over and above, four sound
slaps in the face. Turn the rein, or the halter, of thy Dapple, and
begone home; for one single step further thou shalt not make in my
company. O bread thanklessly received! O promises ill-bestowed! O man
more beast than human being! Now, when I was about to raise thee to
such a position, that, in spite of thy wife, they would call thee 'my
lord,' thou art leaving me? Thou art going now when I had a firm and
fixed intention of making thee lord of the best island in the world?
Well, as thou thyself hast said before now, honey is not for the mouth
of the ass. Ass thou art, ass thou wilt be, and ass thou wilt end when
the course of thy life is run; for I know it will come to its close
before thou dost perceive or discern that thou art a beast." Sancho
regarded Don Quixote earnestly while he was giving him this rating,
and was so touched by remorse that the tears came to his eyes, and in
a piteous and broken voice he said to him, "Master mine, I confess
that, to be a complete ass, all I want is a tail; if your worship will
only fix one on to me, I'll look on it as rightly placed, and I'll
serve you as an ass all the remaining days of my life. Forgive me and
have pity on my folly, and remember I know but little, and, if I talk
much, it's more from infirmity than malice; but he who sins and mends
commends himself to God." "I should have been surprised, Sancho," said
Don Quixote, "if thou hadst not introduced some bit of a proverb into
thy speech. Well, well, I forgive thee, provided thou dost mend and
not show thyself in future so fond of thine own interest, but try to
be of good cheer and take heart, and encourage thyself to look forward
to the fulfillment of my promises, which, by being delayed, does not
become impossible." Sancho said he would do so, and keep up his heart
as best he could. They then entered the grove, and Don Quixote settled
himself at the foot of an elm, and Sancho at that of a beech, for
trees of this kind and others like them always have feet but no hands.
Sancho passed the night in pain, for with the evening dews the blow of
the staff made itself felt all the more. Don Quixote passed it in his
never-failing meditations; but, for all that, they had some winks of
sleep, and with the appearance of daylight they pursued their journey
in quest of the banks of the famous Ebro, where that befell them which
will be told in the following chapter. CHAPTER XXII. OF THE FREEDOM
DON QUIXOTE CONFERRED ON SEVERAL UNFORTUNATES WHO AGAINST THEIR WILL
WERE BEING CARRIED WHERE THEY HAD NO WISH TO GO Cide Hamete Benengeli,
the Arab and Manchegan author, relates in this most grave,
high-sounding, minute, delightful, and original history that after the
discussion between the famous Don Quixote of La Mancha and his squire
Sancho Panza which is set down at the end of chapter twenty-one, Don
Quixote raised his eyes and saw coming along the road he was following
some dozen men on foot strung together by the neck, like beads, on a
great iron chain, and all with manacles on their hands. With them
there came also two men on horseback and two on foot; those on
horseback with wheel-lock muskets, those on foot with javelins and
swords, and as soon as Sancho saw them he said: "That is a chain of
galley slaves, on the way to the galleys by force of the king's
orders." "How by force?" asked Don Quixote; "is it possible that the
king uses force against anyone?" "I do not say that," answered Sancho,
"but that these are people condemned for their crimes to serve by
force in the king's galleys." "In fact," replied Don Quixote, "however
it may be, these people are going where they are taking them by force,
and not of their own will." "Just so," said Sancho. "Then if so," said
Don Quixote, "here is a case for the exercise of my office, to put
down force and to succour and help the wretched." "Recollect, your
worship," said Sancho, "Justice, which is the king himself, is not
using force or doing wrong to such persons, but punishing them for
their crimes." The chain of galley slaves had by this time come up,
and Don Quixote in very courteous language asked those who were in
custody of it to be good enough to tell him the reason or reasons for
which they were conducting these people in this manner. One of the
guards on horseback answered that they were galley slaves belonging to
his majesty, that they were going to the galleys, and that was all
that was to be said and all he had any business to know.
"Nevertheless," replied Don Quixote, "I should like to know from each
of them separately the reason of his misfortune;" to this he added
more to the same effect to induce them to tell him what he wanted so
civilly that the other mounted guard said to him: "Though we have here
the register and certificate of the sentence of every one of these
wretches, this is no time to take them out or read them; come and ask
themselves; they can tell if they choose, and they will, for these
fellows take a pleasure in doing and talking about rascalities." With
this permission, which Don Quixote would have taken even had they not
granted it, he approached the chain and asked the first for what
offences he was now in such a sorry case. He made answer that it was
for being a lover. "For that only?" replied Don Quixote; "why, if for
being lovers they send people to the galleys I might have been rowing
in them long ago." "The love is not the sort your worship is thinking
of," said the galley slave; "mine was that I loved a washerwoman's
basket of clean linen so well, and held it so close in my embrace,
that if the arm of the law had not forced it from me, I should never
have let it go of my own will to this moment; I was caught in the act,
there was no occasion for torture, the case was settled, they treated
me to a hundred lashes on the back, and three years of gurapas
besides, and that was the end of it." "What are gurapas?" asked Don
Quixote. "Gurapas are galleys," answered the galley slave, who was a
young man of about four-and-twenty, and said he was a native of
Piedrahita. Don Quixote asked the same question of the second, who
made no reply, so downcast and melancholy was he; but the first
answered for him, and said, "He, sir, goes as a canary, I mean as a
musician and a singer." "What!" said Don Quixote, "for being musicians
and singers are people sent to the galleys too?" "Yes, sir," answered
the galley slave, "for there is nothing worse than singing under
suffering." "On the contrary, I have heard say," said Don Quixote,
"that he who sings scares away his woes." "Here it is the reverse,"
said the galley slave; "for he who sings once weeps all his life." "I
do not understand it," said Don Quixote; but one of the guards said to
him, "Sir, to sing under suffering means with the non sancta
fraternity to confess under torture; they put this sinner to the
torture and he confessed his crime, which was being a cuatrero, that
is a cattle-stealer, and on his confession they sentenced him to six
years in the galleys, besides two bundred lashes that he has already
had on the back; and he is always dejected and downcast because the
other thieves that were left behind and that march here ill-treat, and
snub, and jeer, and despise him for confessing and not having spirit
enough to say nay; for, say they, 'nay' has no more letters in it than
'yea,' and a culprit is well off when life or death with him depends
on his own tongue and not on that of witnesses or evidence; and to my
thinking they are not very far out." "And I think so too," answered
Don Quixote; then passing on to the third he asked him what he had
asked the others, and the man answered very readily and unconcernedly,
"I am going for five years to their ladyships the gurapas for the want
of ten ducats." "I will give twenty with pleasure to get you out of
that trouble," said Don Quixote. "That," said the galley slave, "is
like a man having money at sea when he is dying of hunger and has no
way of buying what he wants; I say so because if at the right time I
had had those twenty ducats that your worship now offers me, I would
have greased the notary's pen and freshened up the attorney's wit with
them, so that to-day I should be in the middle of the plaza of the
Zocodover at Toledo, and not on this road coupled like a greyhound.
But God is great; patience--there, that's enough of it." Don Quixote
passed on to the fourth, a man of venerable aspect with a white beard
falling below his breast, who on hearing himself asked the reason of
his being there began to weep without answering a word, but the fifth
acted as his tongue and said, "This worthy man is going to the galleys
for four years, after having gone the rounds in ceremony and on
horseback." "That means," said Sancho Panza, "as I take it, to have
been exposed to shame in public." "Just so," replied the galley slave,
"and the offence for which they gave him that punishment was having
been an ear-broker, nay body-broker; I mean, in short, that this
gentleman goes as a pimp, and for having besides a certain touch of
the sorcerer about him." "If that touch had not been thrown in," said
Don Quixote, "he would not deserve, for mere pimping, to row in the
galleys, but rather to command and be admiral of them; for the office
of pimp is no ordinary one, being the office of persons of discretion,
one very necessary in a well-ordered state, and only to be exercised
by persons of good birth; nay, there ought to be an inspector and
overseer of them, as in other offices, and recognised number, as with
the brokers on change; in this way many of the evils would be avoided
which are caused by this office and calling being in the hands of
stupid and ignorant people, such as women more or less silly, and
pages and jesters of little standing and experience, who on the most
urgent occasions, and when ingenuity of contrivance is needed, let the
crumbs freeze on the way to their mouths, and know not which is their
right hand. I should like to go farther, and give reasons to show that
it is advisable to choose those who are to hold so necessary an office
in the state, but this is not the fit place for it; some day I will
expound the matter to some one able to see to and rectify it; all I
say now is, that the additional fact of his being a sorcerer has
removed the sorrow it gave me to see these white hairs and this
venerable countenance in so painful a position on account of his being
a pimp; though I know well there are no sorceries in the world that
can move or compel the will as some simple folk fancy, for our will is
free, nor is there herb or charm that can force it. All that certain
silly women and quacks do is to turn men mad with potions and poisons,
pretending that they have power to cause love, for, as I say, it is an
impossibility to compel the will." "It is true," said the good old
man, "and indeed, sir, as far as the charge of sorcery goes I was not
guilty; as to that of being a pimp I cannot deny it; but I never
thought I was doing any harm by it, for my only object was that all
the world should enjoy itself and live in peace and quiet, without
quarrels or troubles; but my good intentions were unavailing to save
me from going where I never expect to come back from, with this weight
of years upon me and a urinary ailment that never gives me a moment's
ease;" and again he fell to weeping as before, and such compassion did
Sancho feel for him that he took out a real of four from his bosom and
gave it to him in alms. Don Quixote went on and asked another what his
crime was, and the man answered with no less but rather much more
sprightliness than the last one. "I am here because I carried the joke
too far with a couple of cousins of mine, and with a couple of other
cousins who were none of mine; in short, I carried the joke so far
with them all that it ended in such a complicated increase of kindred
that no accountant could make it clear: it was all proved against me,
I got no favour, I had no money, I was near having my neck stretched,
they sentenced me to the galleys for six years, I accepted my fate, it
is the punishment of my fault; I am a young man; let life only last,
and with that all will come right. If you, sir, have anything
wherewith to help the poor, God will repay it to you in heaven, and we
on earth will take care in our petitions to him to pray for the life
and health of your worship, that they may be as long and as good as
your amiable appearance deserves." This one was in the dress of a
student, and one of the guards said he was a great talker and a very
elegant Latin scholar. Behind all these there came a man of thirty, a
very personable fellow, except that when he looked, his eyes turned in
a little one towards the other. He was bound differently from the
rest, for he had to his leg a chain so long that it was wound all
round his body, and two rings on his neck, one attached to the chain,
the other to what they call a "keep-friend" or "friend's foot," from
which hung two irons reaching to his waist with two manacles fixed to
them in which his hands were secured by a big padlock, so that he
could neither raise his hands to his mouth nor lower his head to his
hands. Don Quixote asked why this man carried so many more chains than
the others. The guard replied that it was because he alone had
committed more crimes than all the rest put together, and was so
daring and such a villain, that though they marched him in that
fashion they did not feel sure of him, but were in dread of his making
his escape. "What crimes can he have committed," said Don Quixote, "if
they have not deserved a heavier punishment than being sent to the
galleys?" "He goes for ten years," replied the guard, "which is the
same thing as civil death, and all that need be said is that this good
fellow is the famous Gines de Pasamonte, otherwise called Ginesillo de
Parapilla." "Gently, senor commissary," said the galley slave at this,
"let us have no fixing of names or surnames; my name is Gines, not
Ginesillo, and my family name is Pasamonte, not Parapilla as you say;
let each one mind his own business, and he will be doing enough."
"Speak with less impertinence, master thief of extra measure," replied
the commissary, "if you don't want me to make you hold your tongue in
spite of your teeth." "It is easy to see," returned the galley slave,
"that man goes as God pleases, but some one shall know some day
whether I am called Ginesillo de Parapilla or not." "Don't they call
you so, you liar?" said the guard. "They do," returned Gines, "but I
will make them give over calling me so, or I will be shaved, where, I
only say behind my teeth. If you, sir, have anything to give us, give
it to us at once, and God speed you, for you are becoming tiresome
with all this inquisitiveness about the lives of others; if you want
to know about mine, let me tell you I am Gines de Pasamonte, whose
life is written by these fingers." "He says true," said the
commissary, "for he has himself written his story as grand as you
please, and has left the book in the prison in pawn for two hundred
reals." "And I mean to take it out of pawn," said Gines, "though it
were in for two hundred ducats." "Is it so good?" said Don Quixote.
"So good is it," replied Gines, "that a fig for 'Lazarillo de Tormes,'
and all of that kind that have been written, or shall be written
compared with it: all I will say about it is that it deals with facts,
and facts so neat and diverting that no lies could match them." "And
how is the book entitled?" asked Don Quixote. "The 'Life of Gines de
Pasamonte,'" replied the subject of it. "And is it finished?" asked
Don Quixote. "How can it be finished," said the other, "when my life
is not yet finished? All that is written is from my birth down to the
point when they sent me to the galleys this last time." "Then you have
been there before?" said Don Quixote. "In the service of God and the
king I have been there for four years before now, and I know by this
time what the biscuit and courbash are like," replied Gines; "and it
is no great grievance to me to go back to them, for there I shall have
time to finish my book; I have still many things left to say, and in
the galleys of Spain there is more than enough leisure; though I do
not want much for what I have to write, for I have it by heart." "You
seem a clever fellow," said Don Quixote. "And an unfortunate one,"
replied Gines, "for misfortune always persecutes good wit." "It
persecutes rogues," said the commissary. "I told you already to go
gently, master commissary," said Pasamonte; "their lordships yonder
never gave you that staff to ill-treat us wretches here, but to
conduct and take us where his majesty orders you; if not, by the life
of-never mind-; it may be that some day the stains made in the inn
will come out in the scouring; let everyone hold his tongue and behave
well and speak better; and now let us march on, for we have had quite
enough of this entertainment." The commissary lifted his staff to
strike Pasamonte in return for his threats, but Don Quixote came
between them, and begged him not to ill-use him, as it was not too
much to allow one who had his hands tied to have his tongue a trifle
free; and turning to the whole chain of them he said: "From all you
have told me, dear brethren, make out clearly that though they have
punished you for your faults, the punishments you are about to endure
do not give you much pleasure, and that you go to them very much
against the grain and against your will, and that perhaps this one's
want of courage under torture, that one's want of money, the other's
want of advocacy, and lastly the perverted judgment of the judge may
have been the cause of your ruin and of your failure to obtain the
justice you had on your side. All which presents itself now to my
mind, urging, persuading, and even compelling me to demonstrate in
your case the purpose for which Heaven sent me into the world and
caused me to make profession of the order of chivalry to which I
belong, and the vow I took therein to give aid to those in need and
under the oppression of the strong. But as I know that it is a mark of
prudence not to do by foul means what may be done by fair, I will ask
these gentlemen, the guards and commissary, to be so good as to
release you and let you go in peace, as there will be no lack of
others to serve the king under more favourable circumstances; for it
seems to me a hard case to make slaves of those whom God and nature
have made free. Moreover, sirs of the guard," added Don Quixote,
"these poor fellows have done nothing to you; let each answer for his
own sins yonder; there is a God in Heaven who will not forget to
punish the wicked or reward the good; and it is not fitting that
honest men should be the instruments of punishment to others, they
being therein no way concerned. This request I make thus gently and
quietly, that, if you comply with it, I may have reason for thanking
you; and, if you will not voluntarily, this lance and sword together
with the might of my arm shall compel you to comply with it by force."
"Nice nonsense!" said the commissary; "a fine piece of pleasantry he
has come out with at last! He wants us to let the king's prisoners go,
as if we had any authority to release them, or he to order us to do
so! Go your way, sir, and good luck to you; put that basin straight
that you've got on your head, and don't go looking for three feet on a
cat." "'Tis you that are the cat, rat, and rascal," replied Don
Quixote, and acting on the word he fell upon him so suddenly that
without giving him time to defend himself he brought him to the ground
sorely wounded with a lance-thrust; and lucky it was for him that it
was the one that had the musket. The other guards stood thunderstruck
and amazed at this unexpected event, but recovering presence of mind,
those on horseback seized their swords, and those on foot their
javelins, and attacked Don Quixote, who was waiting for them with
great calmness; and no doubt it would have gone badly with him if the
galley slaves, seeing the chance before them of liberating themselves,
had not effected it by contriving to break the chain on which they
were strung. Such was the confusion, that the guards, now rushing at
the galley slaves who were breaking loose, now to attack Don Quixote
who was waiting for them, did nothing at all that was of any use.
Sancho, on his part, gave a helping hand to release Gines de
Pasamonte, who was the first to leap forth upon the plain free and
unfettered, and who, attacking the prostrate commissary, took from him
his sword and the musket, with which, aiming at one and levelling at
another, he, without ever discharging it, drove every one of the
guards off the field, for they took to flight, as well to escape
Pasamonte's musket, as the showers of stones the now released galley
slaves were raining upon them. Sancho was greatly grieved at the
affair, because he anticipated that those who had fled would report
the matter to the Holy Brotherhood, who at the summons of the
alarm-bell would at once sally forth in quest of the offenders; and he
said so to his master, and entreated him to leave the place at once,
and go into hiding in the sierra that was close by. "That is all very
well," said Don Quixote, "but I know what must be done now;" and
calling together all the galley slaves, who were now running riot, and
had stripped the commissary to the skin, he collected them round him
to hear what he had to say, and addressed them as follows: "To be
grateful for benefits received is the part of persons of good birth,
and one of the sins most offensive to God is ingratitude; I say so
because, sirs, ye have already seen by manifest proof the benefit ye
have received of me; in return for which I desire, and it is my good
pleasure that, laden with that chain which I have taken off your
necks, ye at once set out and proceed to the city of El Toboso, and
there present yourselves before the lady Dulcinea del Toboso, and say
to her that her knight, he of the Rueful Countenance, sends to commend
himself to her; and that ye recount to her in full detail all the
particulars of this notable adventure, up to the recovery of your
longed-for liberty; and this done ye may go where ye will, and good
fortune attend you." Gines de Pasamonte made answer for all, saying,
"That which you, sir, our deliverer, demand of us, is of all
impossibilities the most impossible to comply with, because we cannot
go together along the roads, but only singly and separate, and each
one his own way, endeavouring to hide ourselves in the bowels of the
earth to escape the Holy Brotherhood, which, no doubt, will come out
in search of us. What your worship may do, and fairly do, is to change
this service and tribute as regards the lady Dulcinea del Toboso for a
certain quantity of ave-marias and credos which we will say for your
worship's intention, and this is a condition that can be complied with
by night as by day, running or resting, in peace or in war; but to
imagine that we are going now to return to the flesh-pots of Egypt, I
mean to take up our chain and set out for El Toboso, is to imagine
that it is now night, though it is not yet ten in the morning, and to
ask this of us is like asking pears of the elm tree." "Then by all
that's good," said Don Quixote (now stirred to wrath), "Don son of a
bitch, Don Ginesillo de Paropillo, or whatever your name is, you will
have to go yourself alone, with your tail between your legs and the
whole chain on your back." Pasamonte, who was anything but meek (being
by this time thoroughly convinced that Don Quixote was not quite right
in his head as he had committed such a vagary as to set them free),
finding himself abused in this fashion, gave the wink to his
companions, and falling back they began to shower stones on Don
Quixote at such a rate that he was quite unable to protect himself
with his buckler, and poor Rocinante no more heeded the spur than if
he had been made of brass. Sancho planted himself behind his ass, and
with him sheltered himself from the hailstorm that poured on both of
them. Don Quixote was unable to shield himself so well but that more
pebbles than I could count struck him full on the body with such force
that they brought him to the ground; and the instant he fell the
student pounced upon him, snatched the basin from his head, and with
it struck three or four blows on his shoulders, and as many more on
the ground, knocking it almost to pieces. They then stripped him of a
jacket that he wore over his armour, and they would have stripped off
his stockings if his greaves had not prevented them. From Sancho they
took his coat, leaving him in his shirt-sleeves; and dividing among
themselves the remaining spoils of the battle, they went each one his
own way, more solicitous about keeping clear of the Holy Brotherhood
they dreaded, than about burdening themselves with the chain, or going
to present themselves before the lady Dulcinea del Toboso. The ass and
Rocinante, Sancho and Don Quixote, were all that were left upon the
spot; the ass with drooping head, serious, shaking his ears from time
to time as if he thought the storm of stones that assailed them was
not yet over; Rocinante stretched beside his master, for he too had
been brought to the ground by a stone; Sancho stripped, and trembling
with fear of the Holy Brotherhood; and Don Quixote fuming to find
himself so served by the very persons for whom he had done so much.
CHAPTER XXIII. OF WHAT BEFELL DON QUIXOTE IN THE SIERRA MORENA, WHICH
WAS ONE OF THE RAREST ADVENTURES RELATED IN THIS VERACIOUS HISTORY
Seeing himself served in this way, Don Quixote said to his squire, "I
have always heard it said, Sancho, that to do good to boors is to
throw water into the sea. If I had believed thy words, I should have
avoided this trouble; but it is done now, it is only to have patience
and take warning for the future." "Your worship will take warning as
much as I am a Turk," returned Sancho; "but, as you say this mischief
might have been avoided if you had believed me, believe me now, and a
still greater one will be avoided; for I tell you chivalry is of no
account with the Holy Brotherhood, and they don't care two maravedis
for all the knights-errant in the world; and I can tell you I fancy I
hear their arrows whistling past my ears this minute." "Thou art a
coward by nature, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "but lest thou shouldst
say I am obstinate, and that I never do as thou dost advise, this once
I will take thy advice, and withdraw out of reach of that fury thou so
dreadest; but it must be on one condition, that never, in life or in
death, thou art to say to anyone that I retired or withdrew from this
danger out of fear, but only in compliance with thy entreaties; for if
thou sayest otherwise thou wilt lie therein, and from this time to
that, and from that to this, I give thee lie, and say thou liest and
wilt lie every time thou thinkest or sayest it; and answer me not
again; for at the mere thought that I am withdrawing or retiring from
any danger, above all from this, which does seem to carry some little
shadow of fear with it, I am ready to take my stand here and await
alone, not only that Holy Brotherhood you talk of and dread, but the
brothers of the twelve tribes of Israel, and the Seven Maccabees, and
Castor and Pollux, and all the brothers and brotherhoods in the
world." "Senor," replied Sancho, "to retire is not to flee, and there
is no wisdom in waiting when danger outweighs hope, and it is the part
of wise men to preserve themselves to-day for to-morrow, and not risk
all in one day; and let me tell you, though I am a clown and a boor, I
have got some notion of what they call safe conduct; so repent not of
having taken my advice, but mount Rocinante if you can, and if not I
will help you; and follow me, for my mother-wit tells me we have more
need of legs than hands just now." Don Quixote mounted without
replying, and, Sancho leading the way on his ass, they entered the
side of the Sierra Morena, which was close by, as it was Sancho's
design to cross it entirely and come out again at El Viso or Almodovar
del Campo, and hide for some days among its crags so as to escape the
search of the Brotherhood should they come to look for them. He was
encouraged in this by perceiving that the stock of provisions carried
by the ass had come safe out of the fray with the galley slaves, a
circumstance that he regarded as a miracle, seeing how they pillaged
and ransacked. That night they reached the very heart of the Sierra
Morena, where it seemed prudent to Sancho to pass the night and even
some days, at least as many as the stores he carried might last, and
so they encamped between two rocks and among some cork trees; but
fatal destiny, which, according to the opinion of those who have not
the light of the true faith, directs, arranges, and settles everything
in its own way, so ordered it that Gines de Pasamonte, the famous
knave and thief who by the virtue and madness of Don Quixote had been
released from the chain, driven by fear of the Holy Brotherhood, which
he had good reason to dread, resolved to take hiding in the mountains;
and his fate and fear led him to the same spot to which Don Quixote
and Sancho Panza had been led by theirs, just in time to recognise
them and leave them to fall asleep: and as the wicked are always
ungrateful, and necessity leads to evildoing, and immediate advantage
overcomes all considerations of the future, Gines, who was neither
grateful nor well-principled, made up his mind to steal Sancho Panza's
ass, not troubling himself about Rocinante, as being a prize that was
no good either to pledge or sell. While Sancho slept he stole his ass,
and before day dawned he was far out of reach. Aurora made her
appearance bringing gladness to the earth but sadness to Sancho Panza,
for he found that his Dapple was missing, and seeing himself bereft of
him he began the saddest and most doleful lament in the world, so loud
that Don Quixote awoke at his exclamations and heard him saying, "O
son of my bowels, born in my very house, my children's plaything, my
wife's joy, the envy of my neighbours, relief of my burdens, and
lastly, half supporter of myself, for with the six-and-twenty
maravedis thou didst earn me daily I met half my charges." Don
Quixote, when he heard the lament and learned the cause, consoled
Sancho with the best arguments he could, entreating him to be patient,
and promising to give him a letter of exchange ordering three out of
five ass-colts that he had at home to be given to him. Sancho took
comfort at this, dried his tears, suppressed his sobs, and returned
thanks for the kindness shown him by Don Quixote. He on his part was
rejoiced to the heart on entering the mountains, as they seemed to him
to be just the place for the adventures he was in quest of. They
brought back to his memory the marvellous adventures that had befallen
knights-errant in like solitudes and wilds, and he went along
reflecting on these things, so absorbed and carried away by them that
he had no thought for anything else. Nor had Sancho any other care
(now that he fancied he was travelling in a safe quarter) than to
satisfy his appetite with such remains as were left of the clerical
spoils, and so he marched behind his master laden with what Dapple
used to carry, emptying the sack and packing his paunch, and so long
as he could go that way, he would not have given a farthing to meet
with another adventure. While so engaged he raised his eyes and saw
that his master had halted, and was trying with the point of his pike
to lift some bulky object that lay upon the ground, on which he
hastened to join him and help him if it were needful, and reached him
just as with the point of the pike he was raising a saddle-pad with a
valise attached to it, half or rather wholly rotten and torn; but so
heavy were they that Sancho had to help to take them up, and his
master directed him to see what the valise contained. Sancho did so
with great alacrity, and though the valise was secured by a chain and
padlock, from its torn and rotten condition he was able to see its
contents, which were four shirts of fine holland, and other articles
of linen no less curious than clean; and in a handkerchief he found a
good lot of gold crowns, and as soon as he saw them near at hand he
raised his voice and said: "Halt, knights, or whosoever ye may be, and
render me account of who ye are, whence ye come, where ye go, what it
is ye carry upon that bier, for, to judge by appearances, either ye
have done some wrong or some wrong has been done to you, and it is
fitting and necessary that I should know, either that I may chastise
you for the evil ye have done, or else that I may avenge you for the
injury that has been inflicted upon you." "We are in haste," answered
one of the encamisados, "and the inn is far off, and we cannot stop to
render you such an account as you demand;" and spurring his mule he
moved on. Don Quixote was mightily provoked by this answer, and
seizing the mule by the bridle he said, "Halt, and be more mannerly,
and render an account of what I have asked of you; else, take my
defiance to combat, all of you." The mule was shy, and was so
frightened at her bridle being seized that rearing up she flung her
rider to the ground over her haunches. An attendant who was on foot,
seeing the encamisado fall, began to abuse Don Quixote, who now moved
to anger, without any more ado, laying his lance in rest charged one
of the men in mourning and brought him badly wounded to the ground,
and as he wheeled round upon the others the agility with which he
attacked and routed them was a sight to see, for it seemed just as if
wings had that instant grown upon Rocinante, so lightly and proudly
did he bear himself. The encamisados were all timid folk and unarmed,
so they speedily made their escape from the fray and set off at a run
across the plain with their lighted torches, looking exactly like
maskers running on some gala or festival night. The mourners, too,
enveloped and swathed in their skirts and gowns, were unable to bestir
themselves, and so with entire safety to himself Don Quixote
belaboured them all and drove them off against their will, for they
all thought it was no man but a devil from hell come to carry away the
dead body they had in the litter. Sancho beheld all this in
astonishment at the intrepidity of his lord, and said to himself,
"Clearly this master of mine is as bold and valiant as he says he is."
A burning torch lay on the ground near the first man whom the mule had
thrown, by the light of which Don Quixote perceived him, and coming up
to him he presented the point of the lance to his face, calling on him
to yield himself prisoner, or else he would kill him; to which the
prostrate man replied, "I am prisoner enough as it is; I cannot stir,
for one of my legs is broken: I entreat you, if you be a Christian
gentleman, not to kill me, which will be committing grave sacrilege,
for I am a licentiate and I hold first orders." "Then what the devil
brought you here, being a churchman?" said Don Quixote. "What, senor?"
said the other. "My bad luck." "Then still worse awaits you," said Don
Quixote, "if you do not satisfy me as to all I asked you at first."
"You shall be soon satisfied," said the licentiate; "you must know,
then, that though just now I said I was a licentiate, I am only a
bachelor, and my name is Alonzo Lopez; I am a native of Alcobendas, I
come from the city of Baeza with eleven others, priests, the same who
fled with the torches, and we are going to the city of Segovia
accompanying a dead body which is in that litter, and is that of a
gentleman who died in Baeza, where he was interred; and now, as I
said, we are taking his bones to their burial-place, which is in
Segovia, where he was born." "And who killed him?" asked Don Quixote.
"God, by means of a malignant fever that took him," answered the
bachelor. "In that case," said Don Quixote, "the Lord has relieved me
of the task of avenging his death had any other slain him; but, he who
slew him having slain him, there is nothing for it but to be silent,
and shrug one's shoulders; I should do the same were he to slay
myself; and I would have your reverence know that I am a knight of La
Mancha, Don Quixote by name, and it is my business and calling to roam
the world righting wrongs and redressing injuries." "I do not know how
that about righting wrongs can be," said the bachelor, "for from
straight you have made me crooked, leaving me with a broken leg that
will never see itself straight again all the days of its life; and the
injury you have redressed in my case has been to leave me injured in
such a way that I shall remain injured for ever; and the height of
misadventure it was to fall in with you who go in search of
adventures." "Things do not all happen in the same way," answered Don
Quixote; "it all came, Sir Bachelor Alonzo Lopez, of your going, as
you did, by night, dressed in those surplices, with lighted torches,
praying, covered with mourning, so that naturally you looked like
something evil and of the other world; and so I could not avoid doing
my duty in attacking you, and I should have attacked you even had I
known positively that you were the very devils of hell, for such I
certainly believed and took you to be." "As my fate has so willed it,"
said the bachelor, "I entreat you, sir knight-errant, whose errand has
been such an evil one for me, to help me to get from under this mule
that holds one of my legs caught between the stirrup and the saddle."
"I would have talked on till to-morrow," said Don Quixote; "how long
were you going to wait before telling me of your distress?" He at once
called to Sancho, who, however, had no mind to come, as he was just
then engaged in unloading a sumpter mule, well laden with provender,
which these worthy gentlemen had brought with them. Sancho made a bag
of his coat, and, getting together as much as he could, and as the bag
would hold, he loaded his beast, and then hastened to obey his
master's call, and helped him to remove the bachelor from under the
mule; then putting him on her back he gave him the torch, and Don
Quixote bade him follow the track of his companions, and beg pardon of
them on his part for the wrong which he could not help doing them. And
said Sancho, "If by chance these gentlemen should want to know who was
the hero that served them so, your worship may tell them that he is
the famous Don Quixote of La Mancha, the undoer of wrongs and
injustices; and so, God be with you, and keep in mind what you have
promised and sworn under those penalties that have been already
declared to you." So saying, he gave Rocinante the spur and was soon
out of reach. The farmer followed him with his eyes, and when he saw
that he had cleared the wood and was no longer in sight, he turned to
his boy Andres, and said, "Come here, my son, I want to pay you what I
owe you, as that undoer of wrongs has commanded me." "My oath on it,"
said Andres, "your worship will be well advised to obey the command of
that good knight--may he live a thousand years--for, as he is a
valiant and just judge, by Roque, if you do not pay me, he will come
back and do as he said." "My oath on it, too," said the farmer; "but
as I have a strong affection for you, I want to add to the debt in
order to add to the payment;" and seizing him by the arm, he tied him
up again, and gave him such a flogging that he left him for dead.
"Now, Master Andres," said the farmer, "call on the undoer of wrongs;
you will find he won't undo that, though I am not sure that I have
quite done with you, for I have a good mind to flay you alive." But at
last he untied him, and gave him leave to go look for his judge in
order to put the sentence pronounced into execution. Andres went off
rather down in the mouth, swearing he would go to look for the valiant
Don Quixote of La Mancha and tell him exactly what had happened, and
that all would have to be repaid him sevenfold; but for all that, he
went off weeping, while his master stood laughing. Thus did the
valiant Don Quixote right that wrong, and, thoroughly satisfied with
what had taken place, as he considered he had made a very happy and
noble beginning with his knighthood, he took the road towards his
village in perfect self-content, saying in a low voice, "Well mayest
thou this day call thyself fortunate above all on earth, O Dulcinea
del Toboso, fairest of the fair! since it has fallen to thy lot to
hold subject and submissive to thy full will and pleasure a knight so
renowned as is and will be Don Quixote of La Mancha, who, as all the
world knows, yesterday received the order of knighthood, and hath
to-day righted the greatest wrong and grievance that ever injustice
conceived and cruelty perpetrated: who hath to-day plucked the rod
from the hand of yonder ruthless oppressor so wantonly lashing that
tender child." He now came to a road branching in four directions, and
immediately he was reminded of those cross-roads where knights-errant
used to stop to consider which road they should take. In imitation of
them he halted for a while, and after having deeply considered it, he
gave Rocinante his head, submitting his own will to that of his hack,
who followed out his first intention, which was to make straight for
his own stable. After he had gone about two miles Don Quixote
perceived a large party of people, who, as afterwards appeared, were
some Toledo traders, on their way to buy silk at Murcia. There were
six of them coming along under their sunshades, with four servants
mounted, and three muleteers on foot. Scarcely had Don Quixote
descried them when the fancy possessed him that this must be some new
adventure; and to help him to imitate as far as he could those
passages he had read of in his books, here seemed to come one made on
purpose, which he resolved to attempt. So with a lofty bearing and
determination he fixed himself firmly in his stirrups, got his lance
ready, brought his buckler before his breast, and planting himself in
the middle of the road, just as the licentiate, with an easy, graceful
bearing and step, advanced towards Corchuelo, who came on against him,
darting fire from his eyes, as the saying is. The other two of the
company, the peasants, without dismounting from their asses, served as
spectators of the mortal tragedy. The cuts, thrusts, down strokes,
back strokes and doubles, that Corchuelo delivered were past counting,
and came thicker than hops or hail. He attacked like an angry lion,
but he was met by a tap on the mouth from the button of the
licentiate's sword that checked him in the midst of his furious onset,
and made him kiss it as if it were a relic, though not as devoutly as
relics are and ought to be kissed. The end of it was that the two
squires talked so much and drank so much that sleep had to tie their
tongues and moderate their thirst, for to quench it was impossible;
and so the pair of them fell asleep clinging to the now nearly empty
bota and with half-chewed morsels in their mouths; and there we will
leave them for the present, to relate what passed between the Knight
of the Grove and him of the Rueful Countenance. CHAPTER XIV. WHEREIN
IS CONTINUED THE ADVENTURE OF THE KNIGHT OF THE GROVE, TOGETHER WITH
THE SENSIBLE, ORIGINAL, AND TRANQUIL COLLOQUY THAT PASSED BETWEEN THE
TWO SQUIRES The knights and the squires made two parties, these
telling the story of their lives, the others the story of their loves;
but the history relates first of all the conversation of the servants,
and afterwards takes up that of the masters; and it says that,
withdrawing a little from the others, he of the Grove said to Sancho,
"You must know, brother, that it is the custom with the fighting men
of Andalusia, when they are godfathers in any quarrel, not to stand
idle with folded arms while their godsons fight; I say so to remind
you that while our masters are fighting, we, too, have to fight, and
knock one another to shivers." "That custom, sir squire," replied
Sancho, "may hold good among those bullies and fighting men you talk
of, but certainly not among the squires of knights-errant; at least, I
have never heard my master speak of any custom of the sort, and he
knows all the laws of knight-errantry by heart; but granting it true
that there is an express law that squires are to fight while their
masters are fighting, I don't mean to obey it, but to pay the penalty
that may be laid on peacefully minded squires like myself; for I am
sure it cannot be more than two pounds of wax, and I would rather pay
that, for I know it will cost me less than the lint I shall be at the
expense of to mend my head, which I look upon as broken and split
already; there's another thing that makes it impossible for me to
fight, that I have no sword, for I never carried one in my life." "I
know a good remedy for that," said he of the Grove; "I have here two
linen bags of the same size; you shall take one, and I the other, and
we will fight at bag blows with equal arms." "If that's the way, so be
it with all my heart," said Sancho, "for that sort of battle will
serve to knock the dust out of us instead of hurting us." "That will
not do," said the other, "for we must put into the bags, to keep the
wind from blowing them away, half a dozen nice smooth pebbles, all of
the same weight; and in this way we shall be satisfied and easy, and
you will be content and pleased; nay, I believe we are already so far
agreed with you that even though her portrait should show her blind of
one eye, and distilling vermilion and sulphur from the other, we would
nevertheless, to gratify your worship, say all in her favour that you
desire." "She distils nothing of the kind, vile rabble," said Don
Quixote, burning with rage, "nothing of the kind, I say, only
ambergris and civet in cotton; nor is she one-eyed or humpbacked, but
straighter than a Guadarrama spindle: but ye must pay for the
blasphemy ye have uttered against beauty like that of my lady." And so
saying, he charged with levelled lance against the one who had spoken,
with such fury and fierceness that, if luck had not contrived that
Rocinante should stumble midway and come down, it would have gone hard
with the rash trader. Down went Rocinante, and over went his master,
rolling along the ground for some distance; and when he tried to rise
he was unable, so encumbered was he with lance, buckler, spurs,
helmet, and the weight of his old armour; and all the while he was
struggling to get up he kept saying, "Fly not, cowards and caitiffs!
stay, for not by my fault, but my horse's, am I stretched here." One
of the muleteers in attendance, who could not have had much good
nature in him, hearing the poor prostrate man blustering in this
style, was unable to refrain from giving him an answer on his ribs;
and coming up to him he seized his lance, and having broken it in
pieces, with one of them he began so to belabour our Don Quixote that,
notwithstanding and in spite of his armour, he milled him like a
measure of wheat. His masters called out not to lay on so hard and to
leave him alone, but the muleteers blood was up, and he did not care
to drop the game until he had vented the rest of his wrath, and
gathering up the remaining fragments of the lance he finished with a
discharge upon the unhappy victim, who all through the storm of sticks
that rained on him never ceased threatening heaven, and earth, and the
brigands, for such they seemed to him. At last the muleteer was tired,
and the traders continued their journey, taking with them matter for
talk about the poor fellow who had been cudgelled. He when he found
himself alone made another effort to rise; but if he was unable when
whole and sound, how was he to rise after having been thrashed and
well-nigh knocked to pieces? And yet he esteemed himself fortunate, as
it seemed to him that this was a regular knight-errant's mishap, and
entirely, he considered, the fault of his horse. However, battered in
body as he was, to rise was beyond his power. CHAPTER V. IN WHICH THE
NARRATIVE OF OUR KNIGHT'S MISHAP IS CONTINUED Finding, then, that, in
fact he could not move, he thought himself of having recourse to his
usual remedy, which was to think of some passage in his books, and his
craze brought to his mind that about Baldwin and the Marquis of
Mantua, when Carloto left him wounded on the mountain side, a story
known by heart by the children, not forgotten by the young men, and
lauded and even believed by the old folk; and for all that not a whit
truer than the miracles of Mahomet. This seemed to him to fit exactly
the case in which he found himself, so, making a show of severe
suffering, he began to roll on the ground and with feeble breath
repeat the very words which the wounded knight of the wood is said to
have uttered: Where art thou, lady mine, that thou My sorrow dost not
rue? Thou canst not know it, lady mine, Or else thou art untrue. And
so he went on with the ballad as far as the lines: O noble Marquis of
Mantua, My Uncle and liege lord! As chance would have it, when he had
got to this line there happened to come by a peasant from his own
village, a neighbour of his, who had been with a load of wheat to the
mill, and he, seeing the man stretched there, came up to him and asked
him who he was and what was the matter with him that he complained so
dolefully. Don Quixote was firmly persuaded that this was the Marquis
of Mantua, his uncle, so the only answer he made was to go on with his
ballad, in which he told the tale of his misfortune, and of the loves
of the Emperor's son and his wife all exactly as the ballad sings it.
The peasant stood amazed at hearing such nonsense, and relieving him
of the visor, already battered to pieces by blows, he wiped his face,
which was covered with dust, and as soon as he had done so he
recognised him and said, "Senor Quixada" (for so he appears to have
been called when he was in his senses and had not yet changed from a
quiet country gentleman into a knight-errant), "who has brought your
worship to this pass?" But to all questions the other only went on
with his ballad. Seeing this, the good man removed as well as he could
his breastplate and backpiece to see if he had any wound, but he could
perceive no blood nor any mark whatever. He then contrived to raise
him from the ground, and with no little difficulty hoisted him upon
his ass, which seemed to him to be the easiest mount for him; and
collecting the arms, even to the splinters of the lance, he tied them
on Rocinante, and leading him by the bridle and the ass by the halter
he took the road for the village, very sad to hear what absurd stuff
Don Quixote was talking. Nor was Don Quixote less so, for what with
blows and bruises he could not sit upright on the ass, and from time
to time he sent up sighs to heaven, so that once more he drove the
peasant to ask what ailed him. And it could have been only the devil
himself that put into his head tales to match his own adventures, for
now, forgetting Baldwin, he bethought himself of the Moor Abindarraez,
when the Alcaide of Antequera, Rodrigo de Narvaez, took him prisoner
and carried him away to his castle; so that when the peasant again
asked him how he was and what ailed him, he gave him for reply the
same words and phrases that the captive Abindarraez gave to Rodrigo de
Narvaez, just as he had read the story in the "Diana" of Jorge de
Montemayor where it is written, applying it to his own case so aptly
that the peasant went along cursing his fate that he had to listen to
such a lot of nonsense; from which, however, he came to the conclusion
that his neighbour was mad, and so made all haste to reach the village
to escape the wearisomeness of this harangue of Don Quixote's; who, at
the end of it, said, "Senor Don Rodrigo de Narvaez, your worship must
know that this fair Xarifa I have mentioned is now the lovely Dulcinea
del Toboso, for whom I have done, am doing, and will do the most
famous deeds of chivalry that in this world have been seen, are to be
seen, or ever shall be seen." To this the peasant answered,
"Senor--sinner that I am!--cannot your worship see that I am not Don
Rodrigo de Narvaez nor the Marquis of Mantua, but Pedro Alonso your
neighbour, and that your worship is neither Baldwin nor Abindarraez,
but the worthy gentleman Senor Quixada?" "I know who I am," replied
Don Quixote, "and I know that I may be not only those I have named,
but all the Twelve Peers of France and even all the Nine Worthies,
since my achievements surpass all that they have done all together and
each of them on his own account." With this talk and more of the same
kind they reached the village just as night was beginning to fall, but
the peasant waited until it was a little later that the belaboured
gentleman might not be seen riding in such a miserable trim. When it
was what seemed to him the proper time he entered the village and went
to Don Quixote's house, which he found all in confusion, and there
were the curate and the village barber, who were great friends of Don
Quixote, and his housekeeper was saying to them in a loud voice, "What
does your worship think can have befallen my master, Senor Licentiate
Pero Perez?" for so the curate was called; "it is three days now since
anything has been seen of him, or the hack, or the buckler, lance, or
armour. Miserable me! I am certain of it, and it is as true as that I
was born to die, that these accursed books of chivalry he has, and has
got into the way of reading so constantly, have upset his reason; for
now I remember having often heard him saying to himself that he would
turn knight-errant and go all over the world in quest of adventures.
To the devil and Barabbas with such books, that have brought to ruin
in this way the finest understanding there was in all La Mancha!" The
niece said the same, and, more: "You must know, Master Nicholas"--for
that was the name of the barber--"it was often my uncle's way to stay
two days and nights together poring over these unholy books of
misventures, after which he would fling the book away and snatch up
his sword and fall to slashing the walls; and when he was tired out he
would say he had killed four giants like four towers; and the sweat
that flowed from him when he was weary he said was the blood of the
wounds he had received in battle; and then he would drink a great jug
of cold water and become calm and quiet, saying that this water was a
most precious potion which the sage Esquife, a great magician and
friend of his, had brought him. But I take all the blame upon myself
for never having told your worships of my uncle's vagaries, that you
might put a stop to them before things had come to this pass, and burn
all these accursed books--for he has a great number--that richly
deserve to be burned like heretics." "So say I too," said the curate,
"and by my faith to-morrow shall not pass without public judgment upon
them, and may they be condemned to the flames lest they lead those
that read to behave as my good friend seems to have behaved." All this
the peasant heard, and from it he understood at last what was the
matter with his neighbour, so he began calling aloud, "Open, your
worships, to Senor Baldwin and to Senor the Marquis of Mantua, who
comes badly wounded, and to Senor Abindarraez, the Moor, whom the
valiant Rodrigo de Narvaez, the Alcaide of Antequera, brings captive."
At these words they all hurried out, and when they recognised their
friend, master, and uncle, who had not yet dismounted from the ass
because he could not, they ran to embrace him. "Hold!" said he, "for I
am badly wounded through my horse's fault; carry me to bed, and if
possible send for the wise Urganda to cure and see to my wounds." "See
there! plague on it!" cried the housekeeper at this: "did not my heart
tell the truth as to which foot my master went lame of? To bed with
your worship at once, and we will contrive to cure you here without
fetching that Hurgada. A curse I say once more, and a hundred times
more, on those books of chivalry that have brought your worship to
such a pass." They carried him to bed at once, and after searching for
his wounds could find none, but he said they were all bruises from
having had a severe fall with his horse Rocinante when in combat with
ten giants, the biggest and the boldest to be found on earth. "So,
so!" said the curate, "are there giants in the dance? By the sign of
the Cross I will burn them to-morrow before the day over." They put a
host of questions to Don Quixote, but his only answer to all was--give
him something to eat, and leave him to sleep, for that was what he
needed most. They did so, and the curate questioned the peasant at
great length as to how he had found Don Quixote. He told him, and the
nonsense he had talked when found and on the way home, all which made
the licentiate the more eager to do what he did the next day, which
was to summon his friend the barber, Master Nicholas, and go with him
to Don Quixote's house. CHAPTER VI. OF THE DIVERTING AND IMPORTANT
SCRUTINY WHICH THE CURATE AND THE BARBER MADE IN THE LIBRARY OF OUR
INGENIOUS GENTLEMAN He was still sleeping; so the curate asked the
niece for the keys of the room where the books, the authors of all the
mischief, were, and right willingly she gave them. They all went in,
the housekeeper with them, and found more than a hundred volumes of
big books very well bound, and some other small ones. The moment the
housekeeper saw them she turned about and ran out of the room, and
came back immediately with a saucer of holy water and a sprinkler,
saying, "Here, your worship, senor licentiate, sprinkle this room;
don't leave any magician of the many there are in these books to
bewitch us in revenge for our design of banishing them from the
world." The simplicity of the housekeeper made the licentiate laugh,
and he directed the barber to give him the books one by one to see
what they were about, as there might be some to be found among them
that did not deserve the penalty of fire. "No," said the niece, "there
is no reason for showing mercy to any of them; they have every one of
them done mischief; better fling them out of the window into the court
and make a pile of them and set fire to them; or else carry them into
the yard, and there a bonfire can be made without the smoke giving any
annoyance." The housekeeper said the same, so eager were they both for
the slaughter of those innocents, but the curate would not agree to it
without first reading at any rate the titles. The first that Master
Nicholas put into his hand was "The four books of Amadis of Gaul."
"This seems a mysterious thing," said the curate, "for, as I have
heard say, this was the first book of chivalry printed in Spain, and
from this all the others derive their birth and origin; so it seems to
me that we ought inexorably to condemn it to the flames as the founder
of so vile a sect." "Nay, sir," said the barber, "I too, have heard
say that this is the best of all the books of this kind that have been
written, and so, as something singular in its line, it ought to be
pardoned." "True," said the curate; "and for that reason those who
have hitherto written books of the sort deserve all the more censure
for writing without paying any attention to good taste or the rules of
art, by which they might guide themselves and become as famous in
prose as the two princes of Greek and Latin poetry are in verse." "I
myself, at any rate," said the canon, "was once tempted to write a
book of chivalry in which all the points I have mentioned were to be
observed; and if I must own the truth I have more than a hundred
sheets written; and to try if it came up to my own opinion of it, I
showed them to persons who were fond of this kind of reading, to
learned and intelligent men as well as to ignorant people who cared
for nothing but the pleasure of listening to nonsense, and from all I
obtained flattering approval; nevertheless I proceeded no farther with
it, as well because it seemed to me an occupation inconsistent with my
profession, as because I perceived that the fools are more numerous
than the wise; and, though it is better to be praised by the wise few
than applauded by the foolish many, I have no mind to submit myself to
the stupid judgment of the silly public, to whom the reading of such
books falls for the most part. "But what most of all made me hold my
hand and even abandon all idea of finishing it was an argument I put
to myself taken from the plays that are acted now-a-days, which was in
this wise: if those that are now in vogue, as well those that are pure
invention as those founded on history, are, all or most of them,
downright nonsense and things that have neither head nor tail, like
that affair of the answer to the letter, and that other of six or
eight days ago, which is not yet in history, that is to say, the
affair of the enchantment of my lady Dulcinea; for I made him believe
she is enchanted, though there's no more truth in it than over the
hills of Ubeda." The duchess begged him to tell her about the
enchantment or deception, so Sancho told the whole story exactly as it
had happened, and his hearers were not a little amused by it; and then
resuming, the duchess said, "In consequence of what worthy Sancho has
told me, a doubt starts up in my mind, and there comes a kind of
whisper to my ear that says, 'If Don Quixote be mad, crazy, and
cracked, and Sancho Panza his squire knows it, and, notwithstanding,
serves and follows him, and goes trusting to his empty promises, there
can be no doubt he must be still madder and sillier than his master;
and that being so, it will be cast in your teeth, senora duchess, if
you give the said Sancho an island to govern; for how will he who does
not know how to govern himself know how to govern others?'" "By God,
senora," said Sancho, "but that doubt comes timely; but your grace may
say it out, and speak plainly, or as you like; for I know what you say
is true, and if I were wise I should have left my master long ago; but
this was my fate, this was my bad luck; I can't help it, I must follow
him; we're from the same village, I've eaten his bread, I'm fond of
him, I'm grateful, he gave me his ass-colts, and above all I'm
faithful; so it's quite impossible for anything to separate us, except
the pickaxe and shovel. And if your highness does not like to give me
the island because I'm a fool, like a wise man I will take care to
give myself no trouble about it; I have heard say that 'behind the
cross there's the devil,' and that 'all that glitters is not gold,'
and that from among the oxen, and the ploughs, and the yokes, Wamba
the husbandman was taken to be made King of Spain, and from among
brocades, and pleasures, and riches, Roderick was taken to be devoured
by adders, if the verses of the old ballads don't lie." "To be sure
they don't lie!" exclaimed Dona Rodriguez, the duenna, who was one of
the listeners. "Why, there's a ballad that says they put King Rodrigo
alive into a tomb full of toads, and adders, and lizards, and that two
days afterwards the king, in a plaintive, feeble voice, cried out from
within the tomb-- They gnaw me now, they gnaw me now, There where I
most did sin. And according to that the gentleman has good reason to
say he would rather be a labouring man than a king, if vermin are to
eat him." The duchess could not help laughing at the simplicity of her
duenna, or wondering at the language and proverbs of Sancho, to whom
she said, "Worthy Sancho knows very well that when once a knight has
made a promise he strives to keep it, though it should cost him his
life. My lord and husband the duke, though not one of the errant sort,
is none the less a knight for that reason, and will keep his word
about the promised island, in spite of the envy and malice of the
world. Let Sancho he of good cheer; for when he least expects it he
will find himself seated on the throne of his island and seat of
dignity, and will take possession of his government that he may
discard it for another of three-bordered brocade. The charge I give
him is to be careful how he governs his vassals, bearing in mind that
they are all loyal and well-born." "As to governing them well," said
Sancho, "there's no need of charging me to do that, for I'm
kind-hearted by nature, and full of compassion for the poor; there's
no stealing the loaf from him who kneads and bakes;' and by my faith
it won't do to throw false dice with me; I am an old dog, and I know
all about 'tus, tus;' I can be wide-awake if need be, and I don't let
clouds come before my eyes, for I know where the shoe pinches me; I
say so, because with me the good will have support and protection, and
the bad neither footing nor access. And it seems to me that, in
governments, to make a beginning is everything; and maybe, after
having been governor a fortnight, I'll take kindly to the work and
know more about it than the field labour I have been brought up to."
"You are right, Sancho," said the duchess, "for no one is born ready
taught, and the bishops are made out of men and not out of stones. But
to return to the subject we were discussing just now, the enchantment
of the lady Dulcinea, I look upon it as certain, and something more
than evident, that Sancho's idea of practising a deception upon his
master, making him believe that Dulcinea was enchanted and turned into
a country wench; and of how the duchess, his wife, had persuaded
Sancho that it was he himself who was deceived, inasmuch as Dulcinea
was really enchanted; at which the bachelor laughed not a little, and
marvelled as well at the sharpness and simplicity of Sancho as at the
length to which Don Quixote's madness went. The duke begged of him if
he found him (whether he overcame him or not) to return that way and
let him know the result. This the bachelor did; he set out in quest of
Don Quixote, and not finding him at Saragossa, he went on, and how he
fared has been already told. He returned to the duke's castle and told
him all, what the conditions of the combat were, and how Don Quixote
was now, like a loyal knight-errant, returning to keep his promise of
retiring to his village for a year, by which time, said the bachelor,
he might perhaps be cured of his madness; for that was the object that
had led him to adopt these disguises, as it was a sad thing for a
gentleman of such good parts as Don Quixote to be a madman. And so he
took his leave of the duke, and went home to his village to wait there
for Don Quixote, who was coming after him. Thereupon the duke seized
the opportunity of practising this mystification upon him; so much did
he enjoy everything connected with Sancho and Don Quixote. He had the
roads about the castle far and near, everywhere he thought Don Quixote
was likely to pass on his return, occupied by large numbers of his
servants on foot and on horseback, who were to bring him to the
castle, by fair means or foul, if they met him. They did meet him, and
sent word to the duke, who, having already settled what was to be
done, as soon as he heard of his arrival, ordered the torches and
lamps in the court to be lit and Altisidora to be placed on the
catafalque with all the pomp and ceremony that has been described, the
whole affair being so well arranged and acted that it differed but
little from reality. And Cide Hamete says, moreover, that for his part
he considers the concocters of the joke as crazy as the victims of it,
and that the duke and duchess were not two fingers' breadth removed
from being something like fools themselves when they took such pains
to make game of a pair of fools. As for the latter, one was sleeping
soundly and the other lying awake occupied with his desultory
thoughts, when daylight came to them bringing with it the desire to
rise; for the lazy down was never a delight to Don Quixote, victor or
vanquished. Altisidora, come back from death to life as Don Quixote
fancied, following up the freak of her lord and lady, entered the
chamber, crowned with the garland she had worn on the catafalque and
in a robe of white taffeta embroidered with gold flowers, her hair
flowing loose over her shoulders, and leaning upon a staff of fine
black ebony. Don Quixote, disconcerted and in confusion at her
appearance, huddled himself up and well-nigh covered himself
altogether with the sheets and counterpane of the bed, tongue-tied,
and unable to offer her any civility. Altisidora seated herself on a
chair at the head of the bed, and, after a deep sigh, said to him in a
feeble, soft voice, "When women of rank and modest maidens trample
honour under foot, and give a loose to the tongue that breaks through
every impediment, publishing abroad the inmost secrets of their
hearts, they are reduced to sore extremities. Such a one am I, Senor
Don Quixote of La Mancha, crushed, conquered, love-smitten, but yet
patient under suffering and virtuous, and so much so that my heart
broke with grief and I lost my life. For the last two days I have been
dead, slain by the thought of the cruelty with which thou hast treated
me, obdurate knight, O harder thou than marble to my plaint; or at
least believed to be dead by all who saw me; and had it not been that
Love, taking pity on me, let my recovery rest upon the sufferings of
this good squire, there I should have remained in the other world."
"Love might very well have let it rest upon the sufferings of my ass,
and I should have been obliged to him," said Sancho. "But tell me,
senora--and may heaven send you a tenderer lover than my master-what
did you see in the other world? What goes on in hell? For of course
that's where one who dies in despair is bound for." "To tell you the
truth," said Altisidora, "I cannot have died outright, for I did not
go into hell; had I gone in, it is very certain I should never have
come out again, do what I might. The truth is, I came to the gate,
where some dozen or so of devils were playing tennis, all in breeches
and doublets, with falling collars trimmed with Flemish bonelace, and
ruffles of the same that served them for wristbands, with four
fingers' breadth of the arms exposed to make their hands look longer;
in their hands they held rackets of fire; but what amazed me still
more was that books, apparently full of wind and rubbish, served them
for tennis balls, a strange and marvellous thing; this, however, did
not astonish me so much as to observe that, although with players it
is usual for the winners to be glad and the losers sorry, there in
that game all were growling, all were snarling, and all were cursing
one another." "That's no wonder," said Sancho; "for devils, whether
playing or not, can never be content, win or lose." "Very likely,"
said Altisidora; "but there is another thing that surprises me too, I
mean surprised me then, and that was that no ball outlasted the first
throw or was of any use a second time; and it was wonderful the
constant succession there was of books, new and old. To one of them, a
brand-new, well-bound one, they gave such a stroke that they knocked
the guts out of it and scattered the leaves about. 'Look what book
that is,' said one devil to another, and the other replied, 'It is the
"Second Part of the History of Don Quixote of La Mancha," not by Cide
Hamete, the original author, but by an Aragonese who by his own
account is of Tordesillas.' 'Out of this with it,' said the first,
'and into the depths of hell with it out of my sight.' 'Is it so bad?'
said the other. 'So bad is it,' said the first, 'that if I had set
myself deliberately to make a worse, I could not have done it.' They
then went on with their game, knocking other books about; and I,
having heard them mention the name of Don Quixote whom I love and
adore so, took care to retain this vision in my memory." "A vision it
must have been, no doubt," said Don Quixote, "for there is no other I
in the world; this history has been going about here for some time
from hand to hand, but it does not stay long in any, for everybody
gives it a taste of his foot. I am not disturbed by hearing that I am
wandering in a fantastic shape in the darkness of the pit or in the
daylight above, for I am not the one that history treats of. If it
should be good, faithful, and true, it will have ages of life; but if
it should be bad, from its birth to its burial will not be a very long
journey." Altisidora was about to proceed with her complaint against
Don Quixote, when he said to her, "I have several times told you,
senora that it grieves me you should have set your affections upon me,
as from mine they can only receive gratitude, but no return. I was
born to belong to Dulcinea del Toboso, and the fates, if there are
any, dedicated me to her; and to suppose that any other beauty can
take the place she occupies in my heart is to suppose an
impossibility. This frank declaration should suffice to make you
retire within the bounds of your modesty, for no one can bind himself
to do impossibilities." Hearing this, Altisidora, with a show of anger
and agitation, exclaimed, "God's life! Don Stockfish, soul of a
mortar, stone of a date, more obstinate and obdurate than a clown
asked a favour when he has his mind made up, if I fall upon you I'll
tear your eyes out! Do you fancy, Don Vanquished, Don Cudgelled, that
I died for your sake? All that you have seen to-night has been
make-believe; I'm not the woman to let the black of my nail suffer for
such a camel, much less die!" "That I can well believe," said Sancho;
"for all that about lovers pining to death is absurd; they may talk of
it, but as for doing it-Judas may believe that!" While they were
talking, the musician, singer, and poet, who had sung the two stanzas
given above came in, and making a profound obeisance to Don Quixote
said, "Will your worship, sir knight, reckon and retain me in the
number of your most faithful servants, for I have long been a great
admirer of yours, as well because of your fame as because of your
achievements?" "Will your worship tell me who you are," replied Don
Quixote, "so that my courtesy may be answerable to your deserts?" The
young man replied that he was the musician and songster of the night
before. "Of a truth," said Don Quixote, "your worship has a most
excellent voice; but what you sang did not seem to me very much to the
purpose; for what have Garcilasso's stanzas to do with the death of
this lady?" "Don't be surprised at that," returned the musician; "for
with the callow poets of our day the way is for every one to write as
he pleases and pilfer where he chooses, whether it be germane to the
matter or not, and now-a-days there is no piece of silliness they can
sing or write that is not set down to poetic licence." Don Quixote was
about to reply, but was prevented by the duke and duchess, who came in
to see him, and with them there followed a long and delightful
conversation, in the course of which Sancho said so many droll and
saucy things that he left the duke and duchess wondering not only at
his simplicity but at his sharpness. Don Quixote begged their
permission to take his departure that same day, inasmuch as for a
vanquished knight like himself it was fitter he should live in a
pig-sty than in a royal palace. They gave it very readily, and the
duchess asked him if Altisidora was in his good graces. He replied,
"Senora, let me tell your ladyship that this damsel's ailment comes
entirely of idleness, and the cure for it is honest and constant
employment. She herself has told me that lace is worn in hell; and as
she must know how to make it, let it never be out of her hands; for
when she is occupied in shifting the bobbins to and fro, the image or
images of what she loves will not shift to and fro in her thoughts;
this is the truth, this is my opinion, and this is my advice." "And
mine," added Sancho; "for I never in all my life saw or heard anything
more natural.' 'Those praises and compliments belong to you more
justly than to me, gossip,' said the inventor of the plan; 'for, by
the God that made me, you might give a couple of brays odds to the
best and most finished brayer in the world; the tone you have got is
deep, your voice is well kept up as to time and pitch, and your
finishing notes come thick and fast; in fact, I own myself beaten, and
yield the palm to you, and give in to you in this rare
accomplishment.' 'Well then,' said the owner, 'I'll set a higher value
on myself for the future, and consider that I know something, as I
have an excellence of some sort; for though I always thought I brayed
well, I never supposed I came up to the pitch of perfection you say.'
'And I say too,' said the second, 'that there are rare gifts going to
loss in the world, and that they are ill bestowed upon those who don't
know how to make use of them.' 'Ours,' said the owner of the ass,
'unless it is in cases like this we have now in hand, cannot be of any
service to us, and even in this God grant they may be of some use.' So
saying they separated, and took to their braying once more, but every
instant they were deceiving one another, and coming to meet one
another again, until they arranged by way of countersign, so as to
know that it was they and not the ass, to give two brays, one after
the other. In this way, doubling the brays at every step, they made
the complete circuit of the forest, but the lost ass never gave them
an answer or even the sign of one. How could the poor ill-starred
brute have answered, when, in the thickest part of the forest, they
found him devoured by wolves? As soon as he saw him his owner said, 'I
was wondering he did not answer, for if he wasn't dead he'd have
brayed when he heard us, or he'd have been no ass; but for the sake of
having heard you bray to such perfection, gossip, I count the trouble
I have taken to look for him well bestowed, even though I have found
him dead.' 'It's in a good hand, gossip,' said the other; 'if the
abbot sings well, the acolyte is not much behind him.' So they
returned disconsolate and hoarse to their village, where they told
their friends, neighbours, and acquaintances what had befallen them in
their search for the ass, each crying up the other's perfection in
braying. The whole story came to be known and spread abroad through
the villages of the neighbourhood; and the devil, who never sleeps,
with his love for sowing dissensions and scattering discord
everywhere, blowing mischief about and making quarrels out of nothing,
contrived to make the people of the other towns fall to braying
whenever they saw anyone from our village, as if to throw the braying
of our regidors in our teeth. Then the boys took to it, which was the
same thing for it as getting into the hands and mouths of all the
devils of hell; and braying spread from one town to another in such a
way that the men of the braying town are as easy to be known as blacks
are to be known from whites, and the unlucky joke has gone so far that
several times the scoffed have come out in arms and in a body to do
battle with the scoffers, and neither king nor rook, fear nor shame,
can mend matters. To-morrow or the day after, I believe, the men of my
town, that is, of the braying town, are going to take the field
against another village two leagues away from ours, one of those that
persecute us most; and that we may turn out well prepared I have
bought these lances and halberds you have seen. These are the curious
things I told you I had to tell, and if you don't think them so, I
have got no others;" and with this the worthy fellow brought his story
to a close. Just at this moment there came in at the gate of the inn a
man entirely clad in chamois leather, hose, breeches, and doublet, who
said in a loud voice, "Senor host, have you room? Here's the divining
ape and the show of the Release of Melisendra just coming." "Ods
body!" said the landlord, "why, it's Master Pedro! We're in for a
grand night!" I forgot to mention that the said Master Pedro had his
left eye and nearly half his cheek covered with a patch of green
taffety, showing that something ailed all that side. "Your worship is
welcome, Master Pedro," continued the landlord; "but where are the ape
and the show, for I don't see them?" "They are close at hand," said he
in the chamois leather, "but I came on first to know if there was any
room." "I'd make the Duke of Alva himself clear out to make room for
Master Pedro," said the landlord; "bring in the ape and the show;
there's company in the inn to-night that will pay to see that and the
cleverness of the ape." "So be it by all means," said the duchess;
"tomorrow I'll give you a scourge that will be just the thing for you,
and will accommodate itself to the tenderness of your flesh, as if it
was its own sister." Then said Sancho, "Your highness must know, dear
lady of my soul, that I have a letter written to my wife, Teresa
Panza, giving her an account of all that has happened me since I left
her; I have it here in my bosom, and there's nothing wanting but to
put the address to it; I'd be glad if your discretion would read it,
for I think it runs in the governor style; I mean the way governors
ought to write." "And who dictated it?" asked the duchess. "Who should
have dictated but myself, sinner as I am?" said Sancho. "And did you
write it yourself?" said the duchess. "That I didn't," said Sancho;
"for I can neither read nor write, though I can sign my name." "Let us
see it," said the duchess, "for never fear but you display in it the
quality and quantity of your wit." Sancho drew out an open letter from
his bosom, and the duchess, taking it, found it ran in this fashion:
SANCHO PANZA'S LETTER TO HIS WIFE, TERESA PANZA If I was well whipped
I went mounted like a gentleman; if I have got a good government it is
at the cost of a good whipping. Thou wilt not understand this just
now, my Teresa; by-and-by thou wilt know what it means. I may tell
thee, Teresa, I mean thee to go in a coach, for that is a matter of
importance, because every other way of going is going on all-fours.
Thou art a governor's wife; take care that nobody speaks evil of thee
behind thy back. I send thee here a green hunting suit that my lady
the duchess gave me; alter it so as to make a petticoat and bodice for
our daughter. Don Quixote, my master, if I am to believe what I hear
in these parts, is a madman of some sense, and a droll blockhead, and
I am no way behind him. We have been in the cave of Montesinos, and
the sage Merlin has laid hold of me for the disenchantment of Dulcinea
del Toboso, her that is called Aldonza Lorenzo over there. With three
thousand three hundred lashes, less five, that I'm to give myself, she
will be left as entirely disenchanted as the mother that bore her. Say
nothing of this to anyone; for, make thy affairs public, and some will
say they are white and others will say they are black. I shall leave
this in a few days for my government, to which I am going with a
mighty great desire to make money, for they tell me all new governors
set out with the same desire; I will feel the pulse of it and will let
thee know if thou art to come and live with me or not. Dapple is well
and sends many remembrances to thee; I am not going to leave him
behind though they took me away to be Grand Turk. My lady the duchess
kisses thy hands a thousand times; do thou make a return with two
thousand, for as my master says, nothing costs less or is cheaper than
civility. God has not been pleased to provide another valise for me
with another hundred crowns, like the one the other day; but never
mind, my Teresa, the bell-ringer is in safe quarters, and all will
come out in the scouring of the government; only it troubles me
greatly what they tell me--that once I have tasted it I will eat my
hands off after it; and if that is so it will not come very cheap to
me; though to be sure the maimed have a benefice of their own in the
alms they beg for; so that one way or another thou wilt be rich and in
luck. God give it to thee as he can, and keep me to serve thee. From
this castle, the 20th of July, 1614. Thy husband, the governor. SANCHO
PANZA When she had done reading the letter the duchess said to Sancho,
"On two points the worthy governor goes rather astray; one is in
saying or hinting that this government has been bestowed upon him for
the lashes that he is to give himself, when he knows (and he cannot
deny it) that when my lord the duke promised it to him nobody ever
dreamt of such a thing as lashes; the other is that he shows himself
here to be very covetous; and I would not have him a money-seeker, for
'covetousness bursts the bag,' and the covetous governor does
ungoverned justice." "I don't mean it that way, senora," said Sancho;
"and if you think the letter doesn't run as it ought to do, it's only
to tear it up and make another; and maybe it will be a worse one if it
is left to my gumption." "No, no," said the duchess, "this one will
do, and I wish the duke to see it." With this they betook themselves
to a garden where they were to dine, and the duchess showed Sancho's
letter to the duke, who was highly delighted with it. They dined, and
after the cloth had been removed and they had amused themselves for a
while with Sancho's rich conversation, the melancholy sound of a fife
and harsh discordant drum made itself heard. All seemed somewhat put
out by this dull, confused, martial harmony, especially Don Quixote,
who could not keep his seat from pure disquietude; as to Sancho, it is
needless to say that fear drove him to his usual refuge, the side or
the skirts of the duchess; and indeed and in truth the sound they
heard was a most doleful and melancholy one. While they were still in
uncertainty they saw advancing towards them through the garden two men
clad in mourning robes so long and flowing that they trailed upon the
ground. As they marched they beat two great drums which were likewise
draped in black, and beside them came the fife player, black and
sombre like the others. Following these came a personage of gigantic
stature enveloped rather than clad in a gown of the deepest black, the
skirt of which was of prodigious dimensions. Over the gown, girdling
or crossing his figure, he had a broad baldric which was also black,
and from which hung a huge scimitar with a black scabbard and
furniture. He had his face covered with a transparent black veil,
through which might be descried a very long beard as white as snow. He
came on keeping step to the sound of the drums with great gravity and
dignity; and, in short, his stature, his gait, the sombreness of his
appearance and his following might well have struck with astonishment,
as they did, all who beheld him without knowing who he was. With this
measured pace and in this guise he advanced to kneel before the duke,
who, with the others, awaited him standing. The duke, however, would
not on any account allow him to speak until he had risen. The
prodigious scarecrow obeyed, and standing up, removed the veil from
his face and disclosed the most enormous, the longest, the whitest and
the thickest beard that human eyes had ever beheld until that moment,
and then fetching up a grave, sonorous voice from the depths of his
broad, capacious chest, and fixing his eyes on the duke, he said:
"Most high and mighty senor, my name is Trifaldin of the White Beard;
I am squire to the Countess Trifaldi, otherwise called the Distressed
Duenna, on whose behalf I bear a message to your highness, which is
that your magnificence will be pleased to grant her leave and
permission to come and tell you her trouble, which is one of the
strangest and most wonderful that the mind most familiar with trouble
in the world could have imagined; but first she desires to know if the
valiant and never vanquished knight, Don Quixote of La Mancha, is in
this your castle, for she has come in quest of him on foot and without
breaking her fast from the kingdom of Kandy to your realms here; a
thing which may and ought to be regarded as a miracle or set down to
enchantment; she is even now at the gate of this fortress or
plaisance, and only waits for your permission to enter. I have
spoken." And with that he coughed, and stroked down his beard with
both his hands, and stood very tranquilly waiting for the response of
the duke, which was to this effect: "Many days ago, worthy squire
Trifaldin of the White Beard, we heard of the misfortune of my lady
the Countess Trifaldi, whom the enchanters have caused to be called
the Distressed Duenna. Bid her enter, O stupendous squire, and tell
her that the valiant knight Don Quixote of La Mancha is here, and from
his generous disposition she may safely promise herself every
protection and assistance; and you may tell her, too, that if my aid
be necessary it will not be withheld, for I am bound to give it to her
by my quality of knight, which involves the protection of women of all
sorts, especially widowed, wronged, and distressed dames, such as her
ladyship seems to be." On hearing this Trifaldin bent the knee to the
ground, and making a sign to the fifer and drummers to strike up, he
turned and marched out of the garden to the same notes and at the same
pace as when he entered, leaving them all amazed at his bearing and
solemnity. Turning to Don Quixote, the duke said, "After all, renowned
knight, the mists of malice and ignorance are unable to hide or
obscure the light of valour and virtue. I say so, because your
excellence has been barely six days in this castle, and already the
unhappy and the afflicted come in quest of you from lands far distant
and remote, and not in coaches or on dromedaries, but on foot and
fasting, confident that in that mighty arm they will find a cure for
their sorrows and troubles; thanks to your great achievements, which
are circulated all over the known earth." "I wish, senor duke,"
replied Don Quixote, "that blessed ecclesiastic, who at table the
other day showed such ill-will and bitter spite against
knights-errant, were here now to see with his own eyes whether knights
of the sort are needed in the world; he would at any rate learn by
experience that those suffering any extraordinary affliction or
sorrow, in extreme cases and unusual misfortunes do not go to look for
a remedy to the houses of jurists or village sacristans, or to the
knight who has never attempted to pass the bounds of his own town, or
to the indolent courtier who only seeks for news to repeat and talk
of, instead of striving to do deeds and exploits for others to relate
and record. Relief in distress, help in need, protection for damsels,
consolation for widows, are to be found in no sort of persons better
than in knights-errant; and I give unceasing thanks to heaven that I
am one, and regard any misfortune or suffering that may befall me in
the pursuit of so honourable a calling as endured to good purpose. Let
this duenna come and ask what she will, for I will effect her relief
by the might of my arm and the dauntless resolution of my bold heart."
CHAPTER XXXVII. WHEREIN IS CONTINUED THE NOTABLE ADVENTURE OF THE
DISTRESSED DUENNA The duke and duchess were extremely glad to see how
readily Don Quixote fell in with their scheme; but at this moment
Sancho observed, "I hope this senora duenna won't be putting any
difficulties in the way of the promise of my government; for I have
heard a Toledo apothecary, who talked like a goldfinch, say that where
duennas were mixed up nothing good could happen. God bless me, how he
hated them, that same apothecary! And so what I'm thinking is, if all
duennas, of whatever sort or condition they may be, are plagues and
busybodies, what must they be that are distressed, like this Countess
Three-skirts or Three-tails!--for in my country skirts or tails, tails
or skirts, it's all one." "Hush, friend Sancho," said Don Quixote;
"since this lady duenna comes in quest of me from such a distant land
she cannot be one of those the apothecary meant; moreover this is a
countess, and when countesses serve as duennas it is in the service of
queens and empresses, for in their own houses they are mistresses
paramount and have other duennas to wait on them." To this Dona
Rodriguez, who was present, made answer, "My lady the duchess has
duennas in her service that might be countesses if it was the will of
fortune; 'but laws go as kings like;' let nobody speak ill of duennas,
above all of ancient maiden ones; for though I am not one myself, I
know and am aware of the advantage a maiden duenna has over one that
is a widow; but 'he who clipped us has kept the scissors.'" "For all
that," said Sancho, "there's so much to be clipped about duennas, so
my barber said, that 'it will be better not to stir the rice even
though it sticks.'" "These squires," returned Dona Rodriguez, "are
always our enemies; and as they are the haunting spirits of the
antechambers and watch us at every step, whenever they are not saying
their prayers (and that's often enough) they spend their time in
tattling about us, digging up our bones and burying our good name. But
I can tell these walking blocks that we will live in spite of them,
and in great houses too, though we die of hunger and cover our flesh,
be it delicate or not, with widow's weeds, as one covers or hides a
dunghill on a procession day. By my faith, if it were permitted me and
time allowed, I could prove, not only to those here present, but to
all the world, that there is no virtue that is not to be found in a
duenna." "I have no doubt," said the duchess, "that my good Dona
Rodriguez is right, and very much so; but she had better bide her time
for fighting her own battle and that of the rest of the duennas, so as
to crush the calumny of that vile apothecary, and root out the
prejudice in the great Sancho Panza's mind." To which Sancho replied,
"Ever since I have sniffed the governorship I have got rid of the
humours of a squire, and I don't care a wild fig for all the duennas
in the world." They would have carried on this duenna dispute further
had they not heard the notes of the fife and drums once more, from
which they concluded that the Distressed Duenna was making her
entrance. The duchess asked the duke if it would be possible to oblige
him with a pad of some kind, or a cushion; even if it were off the
couch of his lady the duchess, or the bed of one of the pages; as the
haunches of that horse were more like marble than wood. On this the
Trifaldi observed that Clavileno would not bear any kind of harness or
trappings, and that his best plan would be to sit sideways like a
woman, as in that way he would not feel the hardness so much. Sancho
did so, and, bidding them farewell, allowed his eyes to be bandaged,
but immediately afterwards uncovered them again, and looking tenderly
and tearfully on those in the garden, bade them help him in his
present strait with plenty of Paternosters and Ave Marias, that God
might provide some one to say as many for them, whenever they found
themselves in a similar emergency. At this Don Quixote exclaimed, "Art
thou on the gallows, thief, or at thy last moment, to use pitiful
entreaties of that sort? Cowardly, spiritless creature, art thou not
in the very place the fair Magalona occupied, and from which she
descended, not into the grave, but to become Queen of France; unless
the histories lie? And I who am here beside thee, may I not put myself
on a par with the valiant Pierres, who pressed this very spot that I
now press? Cover thine eyes, cover thine eyes, abject animal, and let
not thy fear escape thy lips, at least in my presence." "Blindfold
me," said Sancho; "as you won't let me commend myself or be commended
to God, is it any wonder if I am afraid there is a region of devils
about here that will carry us off to Peralvillo?" They were then
blindfolded, and Don Quixote, finding himself settled to his
satisfaction, felt for the peg, and the instant he placed his fingers
on it, all the duennas and all who stood by lifted up their voices
exclaiming, "God guide thee, valiant knight! God be with thee,
intrepid squire! Now, now ye go cleaving the air more swiftly than an
arrow! Now ye begin to amaze and astonish all who are gazing at you
from the earth! Take care not to wobble about, valiant Sancho! Mind
thou fall not, for thy fall will be worse than that rash youth's who
tried to steer the chariot of his father the Sun!" As Sancho heard the
voices, clinging tightly to his master and winding his arms round him,
he said, "Senor, how do they make out we are going up so high, if
their voices reach us here and they seem to be speaking quite close to
us?" "Don't mind that, Sancho," said Don Quixote; "for as affairs of
this sort, and flights like this are out of the common course of
things, you can see and hear as much as you like a thousand leagues
off; but don't squeeze me so tight or thou wilt upset me; and really I
know not what thou hast to be uneasy or frightened at, for I can
safely swear I never mounted a smoother-going steed all the days of my
life; one would fancy we never stirred from one place. Banish fear, my
friend, for indeed everything is going as it ought, and we have the
wind astern." "That's true," said Sancho, "for such a strong wind
comes against me on this side, that it seems as if people were blowing
on me with a thousand pair of bellows;" which was the case; they were
puffing at him with a great pair of bellows; for the whole adventure
was so well planned by the duke, the duchess, and their majordomo,
that nothing was omitted to make it perfectly successful. Don Quixote
now, feeling the blast, said, "Beyond a doubt, Sancho, we must have
already reached the second region of the air, where the hail and snow
are generated; the thunder, the lightning, and the thunderbolts are
engendered in the third region, and if we go on ascending at this
rate, we shall shortly plunge into the region of fire, and I know not
how to regulate this peg, so as not to mount up where we shall be
burned." And now they began to warm their faces, from a distance, with
tow that could be easily set on fire and extinguished again, fixed on
the end of a cane. On feeling the heat Sancho said, "May I die if we
are not already in that fire place, or very near it, for a good part
of my beard has been singed, and I have a mind, senor, to uncover and
see whereabouts we are." "Do nothing of the kind," said Don Quixote;
"I have only to command, and he will obey me; and as he has sworn to
me by the order of knighthood which he has received, I leave him free,
and I guarantee the payment." "Consider what you are saying, senor,"
said the youth; "this master of mine is not a knight, nor has he
received any order of knighthood; for he is Juan Haldudo the Rich, of
Quintanar." "That matters little," replied Don Quixote; "there may be
Haldudos knights; moreover, everyone is the son of his works." "That
is true," said Andres; "but this master of mine--of what works is he
the son, when he refuses me the wages of my sweat and labour?" "I do
not refuse, brother Andres," said the farmer, "be good enough to come
along with me, and I swear by all the orders of knighthood there are
in the world to pay you as I have agreed, real by real, and perfumed."
"For the perfumery I excuse you," said Don Quixote; "give it to him in
reals, and I shall be satisfied; and see that you do as you have
sworn; if not, by the same oath I swear to come back and hunt you out
and punish you; and I shall find you though you should lie closer than
a lizard. And if you desire to know who it is lays this command upon
you, that you be more firmly bound to obey it, know that I am the
valorous Don Quixote of La Mancha, the undoer of injustice, the
righter of wrongs, the protector of damsels, the terror of giants, and
the winner of battles?" "That," said the goatherd, "sounds like what
one reads in the books of the knights-errant, who did all that you say
this man does; though it is my belief that either you are joking, or
else this gentleman has empty lodgings in his head." "You are a great
scoundrel," said Don Quixote, "and it is you who are empty and a fool.
I am fuller than ever was the whoreson bitch that bore you;" and
passing from words to deeds, he caught up a loaf that was near him and
sent it full in the goatherd's face, with such force that he flattened
his nose; but the goatherd, who did not understand jokes, and found
himself roughly handled in such good earnest, paying no respect to
carpet, tablecloth, or diners, sprang upon Don Quixote, and seizing
him by the throat with both hands would no doubt have throttled him,
had not Sancho Panza that instant come to the rescue, and grasping him
by the shoulders flung him down on the table, smashing plates,
breaking glasses, and upsetting and scattering everything on it. Don
Quixote, finding himself free, strove to get on top of the goatherd,
who, with his face covered with blood, and soundly kicked by Sancho,
was on all fours feeling about for one of the table-knives to take a
bloody revenge with. The canon and the curate, however, prevented him,
but the barber so contrived it that he got Don Quixote under him, and
rained down upon him such a shower of fisticuffs that the poor
knight's face streamed with blood as freely as his own. The canon and
the curate were bursting with laughter, the officers were capering
with delight, and both the one and the other hissed them on as they do
dogs that are worrying one another in a fight. Sancho alone was
frantic, for he could not free himself from the grasp of one of the
canon's servants, who kept him from going to his master's assistance.
At last, while they were all, with the exception of the two bruisers
who were mauling each other, in high glee and enjoyment, they heard a
trumpet sound a note so doleful that it made them all look in the
direction whence the sound seemed to come. But the one that was most
excited by hearing it was Don Quixote, who though sorely against his
will he was under the goatherd, and something more than pretty well
pummelled, said to him, "Brother devil (for it is impossible but that
thou must be one since thou hast had might and strength enough to
overcome mine), I ask thee to agree to a truce for but one hour for
the solemn note of yonder trumpet that falls on our ears seems to me
to summon me to some new adventure." The goatherd, who was by this
time tired of pummelling and being pummelled, released him at once,
and Don Quixote rising to his feet and turning his eyes to the quarter
where the sound had been heard, suddenly saw coming down the slope of
a hill several men clad in white like penitents. The fact was that the
clouds had that year withheld their moisture from the earth, and in
all the villages of the district they were organising processions,
rogations, and penances, imploring God to open the hands of his mercy
and send the rain; and to this end the people of a village that was
hard by were going in procession to a holy hermitage there was on one
side of that valley. Don Quixote when he saw the strange garb of the
penitents, without reflecting how often he had seen it before, took it
into his head that this was a case of adventure, and that it fell to
him alone as a knight-errant to engage in it; and he was all the more
confirmed in this notion, by the idea that an image draped in black
they had with them was some illustrious lady that these villains and
discourteous thieves were carrying off by force. As soon as this
occurred to him he ran with all speed to Rocinante who was grazing at
large, and taking the bridle and the buckler from the saddle-bow, he
had him bridled in an instant, and calling to Sancho for his sword he
mounted Rocinante, braced his buckler on his arm, put his lance in
rest, and making a considerable circuit of the plain came back at a
half-gallop exclaiming: "Whoever shall say that I have been enchanted
with just cause, provided my lady the Princess Micomicona grants me
permission to do so, I give him the lie, challenge him and defy him to
single combat." The newly arrived travellers were amazed at the words
of Don Quixote; but the landlord removed their surprise by telling
them who he was, and not to mind him as he was out of his senses. They
then asked the landlord if by any chance a youth of about fifteen
years of age had come to that inn, one dressed like a muleteer, and of
such and such an appearance, describing that of Dona Clara's lover.
The landlord replied that there were so many people in the inn he had
not noticed the person they were inquiring for; but one of them
observing the coach in which the Judge had come, said, "He is here no
doubt, for this is the coach he is following: let one of us stay at
the gate, and the rest go in to look for him; or indeed it would be as
well if one of us went round the inn, lest he should escape over the
wall of the yard." "So be it," said another; and while two of them
went in, one remained at the gate and the other made the circuit of
the inn; observing all which, the landlord was unable to conjecture
for what reason they were taking all these precautions, though he
understood they were looking for the youth whose description they had
given him. It was by this time broad daylight; and for that reason, as
well as in consequence of the noise Don Quixote had made, everybody
was awake and up, but particularly Dona Clara and Dorothea; for they
had been able to sleep but badly that night, the one from agitation at
having her lover so near her, the other from curiosity to see him. Don
Quixote, when he saw that not one of the four travellers took any
notice of him or replied to his challenge, was furious and ready to
die with indignation and wrath; and if he could have found in the
ordinances of chivalry that it was lawful for a knight-errant to
undertake or engage in another enterprise, when he had plighted his
word and faith not to involve himself in any until he had made an end
of the one to which he was pledged, he would have attacked the whole
of them, and would have made them return an answer in spite of
themselves. But considering that it would not become him, nor be
right, to begin any new emprise until he had established Micomicona in
her kingdom, he was constrained to hold his peace and wait quietly to
see what would be the upshot of his vainglorious and extraordinary
proposal. Don Quixote, then, having, as has been said, planted himself
in the middle of the road, just as the licentiate, with an easy,
graceful bearing and step, advanced towards Corchuelo, who came on
against him, darting fire from his eyes, as the saying is. The other
two of the company, the peasants, without dismounting from their
asses, served as spectators of the mortal tragedy. The cuts, thrusts,
down strokes, back strokes and doubles, that Corchuelo delivered were
past counting, and came thicker than hops or hail. He attacked like an
angry lion, but he was met by a tap on the mouth from the button of
the licentiate's sword that checked him in the midst of his furious
onset, and made him kiss it as if it were a relic, though not as
devoutly as relics are and ought to be kissed. The end of it was that
the two squires talked so much and drank so much that sleep had to tie
their tongues and moderate their thirst, for to quench it was
impossible; and so the pair of them fell asleep clinging to the now
nearly empty bota and with half-chewed morsels in their mouths; and
there we will leave them for the present, to relate what passed
between the Knight of the Grove and him of the Rueful Countenance.
CHAPTER XIV. WHEREIN IS CONTINUED THE ADVENTURE OF THE KNIGHT OF THE
GROVE, TOGETHER WITH THE SENSIBLE, ORIGINAL, AND TRANQUIL COLLOQUY
THAT PASSED BETWEEN THE TWO SQUIRES The knights and the squires made
two parties, these telling the story of their lives, the others the
story of their loves; but the history relates first of all the
conversation of the servants, and afterwards takes up that of the
masters; and it says that, withdrawing a little from the others, he of
the Grove said to Sancho, "A hard life it is we lead and live, senor,
we that are squires to knights-errant; verily, we eat our bread in the
sweat of our faces, which is one of the curses God laid on our first
parents." "It may be said, too," added Sancho, "that we eat it in the
chill of our bodies; for who gets more heat and cold than the
miserable squires of knight-errantry? Even so it would not be so bad
if we had something to eat, for woes are lighter if there's bread; but
sometimes we go a day or two without breaking our fast, except with
the wind that blows." "All that," said he of the Grove, "may be
endured and put up with when we have hopes of reward; for, unless the
knight-errant he serves is excessively unlucky, after a few turns the
squire will at least find himself rewarded with a fine government of
some island or some fair county." "I," said Sancho, "have already told
my master that I shall be content with the government of some island,
and he is so noble and generous that he has promised it to me ever so
many times." "I," said he of the Grove, "shall be satisfied with a
canonry for my services, and my master has already assigned me one."
"Your master," said Sancho, "no doubt is a knight in the Church line,
and can bestow rewards of that sort on his good squire; but mine is
only a layman; though I remember some clever, but, to my mind,
designing people, strove to persuade him to try and become an
archbishop. He, however, would not be anything but an emperor; but I
was trembling all the time lest he should take a fancy to go into the
Church, not finding myself fit to hold office in it; for I may tell
you, though I seem a man, I am no better than a beast for the Church."
"Well, then, you are wrong there," said he of the Grove; "for those
island governments are not all satisfactory; some are awkward, some
are poor, some are dull, and, in short, the highest and choicest
brings with it a heavy burden of cares and troubles which the unhappy
wight to whose lot it has fallen bears upon his shoulders. Far better
would it be for us who have adopted this accursed service to go back
to our own houses, and there employ ourselves in pleasanter
occupations--in hunting or fishing, for instance; for what squire in
the world is there so poor as not to have a hack and a couple of
greyhounds and a fishingrod to amuse himself with in his own village?"
"I am not in want of any of those things," said Sancho; "to be sure I
have no hack, but I have an ass that is worth my master's horse twice
over; God send me a bad Easter, and that the next one I am to see, if
I would swap, even if I got four bushels of barley to boot. You will
laugh at the value I put on my Dapple--for dapple is the colour of my
beast. As to greyhounds, I can't want for them, for there are enough
and to spare in my town; and, moreover, there is more pleasure in
sport when it is at other people's expense." "In truth and earnest,
sir squire," said he of the Grove, "I have made up my mind and
determined to have done with these drunken vagaries of these knights,
and go back to my village, and bring up my children; for I have three,
like three Oriental pearls." "I have two," said Sancho, "that might be
presented before the Pope himself, especially a girl whom I am
breeding up for a countess, please God, though in spite of her
mother." "And how old is this lady that is being bred up for a
countess?" asked he of the Grove. "Fifteen, a couple of years more or
less," answered Sancho; "but she is as tall as a lance, and as fresh
as an April morning, and as strong as a porter." "Those are gifts to
fit her to be not only a countess but a nymph of the greenwood," said
he of the Grove; "whoreson strumpet! what pith the rogue must have!"
To which Sancho made answer, somewhat sulkily, "She's no strumpet, nor
was her mother, nor will either of them be, please God, while I live;
speak more civilly; for one bred up among knights-errant, who are
courtesy itself, your words don't seem to me to be very becoming." "O
how little you know about compliments, sir squire," returned he of the
Grove. "What! don't you know that when a horseman delivers a good
lance thrust at the bull in the plaza, or when anyone does anything
very well, the people are wont to say, 'Ha, whoreson rip! how well he
has done it!' and that what seems to be abuse in the expression is
high praise? Disown sons and daughters, senor, who don't do what
deserves that compliments of this sort should be paid to their
parents." "I do disown them," replied Sancho, "and in this way, and by
the same reasoning, you might call me and my children and my wife all
the strumpets in the world, for all they do and say is of a kind that
in the highest degree deserves the same praise; and to see them again
I pray God to deliver me from mortal sin, or, what comes to the same
thing, to deliver me from this perilous calling of squire into which I
have fallen a second time, decayed and beguiled by a purse with a
hundred ducats that I found one day in the heart of the Sierra Morena;
and the devil is always putting a bag full of doubloons before my
eyes, here, there, everywhere, until I fancy at every stop I am
putting my hand on it, and hugging it, and carrying it home with me,
and making investments, and getting interest, and living like a
prince; and so long as I think of this I make light of all the
hardships I endure with this simpleton of a master of mine, who, I
well know, is more of a madman than a knight." "There's why they say
that 'covetousness bursts the bag,'" said he of the Grove; "but if you
come to talk of that sort, there is not a greater one in the world
than my master, for he is one of those of whom they say, 'the cares of
others kill the ass;' for, in order that another knight may recover
the senses he has lost, he makes a madman of himself and goes looking
for what, when found, may, for all I know, fly in his own face." "And
is he in love perchance?" asked Sancho. "He is," said of the Grove,
"with one Casildea de Vandalia, the rawest and best roasted lady the
whole world could produce; but that rawness is not the only foot he
limps on, for he has greater schemes rumbling in his bowels, as will
be seen before many hours are over." "There's no road so smooth but it
has some hole or hindrance in it," said Sancho; "in other houses they
cook beans, but in mine it's by the potful; madness will have more
followers and hangers-on than sound sense; but if there be any truth
in the common saying, that to have companions in trouble gives some
relief, I may take consolation from you, inasmuch as you serve a
master as crazy as my own." "Crazy but valiant," replied he of the
Grove, "and more roguish than crazy or valiant." "Mine is not that,"
said Sancho; "I mean he has nothing of the rogue in him; on the
contrary, he has the soul of a pitcher; he has no thought of doing
harm to anyone, only good to all, nor has he any malice whatever in
him; a child might persuade him that it is night at noonday; and for
this simplicity I love him as the core of my heart, and I can't bring
myself to leave him, let him do ever such foolish things." "For all
that, brother and senor," said he of the Grove, "if the blind lead the
blind, both are in danger of falling into the pit. It is better for us
to beat a quiet retreat and get back to our own quarters; for those
who seek adventures don't always find good ones." Sancho kept spitting
from time to time, and his spittle seemed somewhat ropy and dry,
observing which the compassionate squire of the Grove said, "It seems
to me that with all this talk of ours our tongues are sticking to the
roofs of our mouths; but I have a pretty good loosener hanging from
the saddle-bow of my horse," and getting up he came back the next
minute with a large bota of wine and a pasty half a yard across; and
this is no exaggeration, for it was made of a house rabbit so big that
Sancho, as he handled it, took it to be made of a goat, not to say a
kid, and looking at it he said, "And do you carry this with you,
senor?" "Why, what are you thinking about?" said the other; "do you
take me for some paltry squire? I carry a better larder on my horse's
croup than a general takes with him when he goes on a march." Sancho
ate without requiring to be pressed, and in the dark bolted mouthfuls
like the knots on a tether, and said he, "You are a proper trusty
squire, one of the right sort, sumptuous and grand, as this banquet
shows, which, if it has not come here by magic art, at any rate has
the look of it; not like me, unlucky beggar, that have nothing more in
my alforjas than a scrap of cheese, so hard that one might brain a
giant with it, and, to keep it company, a few dozen carobs and as many
more filberts and walnuts; thanks to the austerity of my master, and
the idea he has and the rule he follows, that knights-errant must not
live or sustain themselves on anything except dried fruits and the
herbs of the field." "By my faith, brother," said he of the Grove, "my
stomach is not made for thistles, or wild pears, or roots of the
woods; let our masters do as they like, with their chivalry notions
and laws, and eat what those enjoin; I carry my prog-basket and this
bota hanging to the saddle-bow, whatever they may say; and it is such
an object of worship with me, and I love it so, that there is hardly a
moment but I am kissing and embracing it over and over again;" and so
saying he thrust it into Sancho's hands, who raising it aloft pointed
to his mouth, gazed at the stars for a quarter of an hour; and when he
had done drinking let his head fall on one side, and giving a deep
sigh, exclaimed, "Ah, whoreson rogue, how catholic it is!" "There, you
see," said he of the Grove, hearing Sancho's exclamation, "how you
have called this wine whoreson by way of praise." "Well," said Sancho,
"I own it, and I grant it is no dishonour to call anyone whoreson when
it is to be understood as praise. But tell me, senor, by what you love
best, is this Ciudad Real wine?" "O rare wine-taster!" said he of the
Grove; "nowhere else indeed does it come from, and it has some years'
age too." "Leave me alone for that," said Sancho; "never fear but I'll
hit upon the place it came from somehow. What would you say, sir
squire, to my having such a great natural instinct in judging wines
that you have only to let me smell one and I can tell positively its
country, its kind, its flavour and soundness, the changes it will
undergo, and everything that appertains to a wine? But it is no
wonder, for I have had in my family, on my father's side, the two best
wine-tasters that have been known in La Mancha for many a long year,
and to prove it I'll tell you now a thing that happened them. They
gave the two of them some wine out of a cask, to try, asking their
opinion as to the condition, quality, goodness or badness of the wine.
One of them tried it with the tip of his tongue, the other did no more
than bring it to his nose. The first said the wine had a flavour of
iron, the second said it had a stronger flavour of cordovan. The owner
said the cask was clean, and that nothing had been added to the wine
from which it could have got a flavour of either iron or leather.
Nevertheless, these two great wine-tasters held to what they had said.
Time went by, the wine was sold, and when they came to clean out the
cask, they found in it a small key hanging to a thong of cordovan; see
now if one who comes of the same stock has not a right to give his
opinion in such like cases." "Therefore, I say," said he of the Grove,
"let us give up going in quest of adventures, and as we have loaves
let us not go looking for cakes, but return to our cribs, for God will
find us there if it be his will." "Until my master reaches Saragossa,"
said Sancho, "I'll remain in his service; after that we'll see." The
end of it was that the licentiate reckoned up for him by thrusts every
one of the buttons of the short cassock he wore, tore the skirts into
strips, like the tails of a cuttlefish, knocked off his hat twice, and
so completely tired him out, that in vexation, anger, and rage, he
took the sword by the hilt and flung it away with such force, that one
of the peasants that were there, who was a notary, and who went for
it, made an affidavit afterwards that he sent it nearly three-quarters
of a league, which testimony will serve, and has served, to show and
establish with all certainty that strength is overcome by skill.
Corchuelo sat down wearied, and Sancho approaching him said, "By my
faith, senor bachelor, if your worship takes my advice, you will never
challenge anyone to fence again, only to wrestle and throw the bar,
for you have the youth and strength for that; but as for these fencers
as they call them, I have heard say they can put the point of a sword
through the eye of a needle." "I am satisfied with having tumbled off
my donkey," said Corchuelo, "and with having had the truth I was so
ignorant of proved to me by experience;" and getting up he embraced
the licentiate, and they were better friends than ever; and not caring
to wait for the notary who had gone for the sword, as they saw he
would be a long time about it, they resolved to push on so as to reach
the village of Quiteria, to which they all belonged, in good time.
During the remainder of the journey the licentiate held forth to them
on the excellences of the sword, with such conclusive arguments, and
such figures and mathematical proofs, that all were convinced of the
value of the science, and Corchuelo cured of his dogmatism. It grew
dark; but before they reached the town it seemed to them all as if
there was a heaven full of countless glittering stars in front of it.
They heard, too, the pleasant mingled notes of a variety of
instruments, flutes, drums, psalteries, pipes, tabors, and timbrels,
and as they drew near they perceived that the trees of a leafy arcade
that had been constructed at the entrance of the town were filled with
lights unaffected by the wind, for the breeze at the time was so
gentle that it had not power to stir the leaves on the trees. The
musicians were the life of the wedding, wandering through the pleasant
grounds in separate bands, some dancing, others singing, others
playing the various instruments already mentioned. In short, it seemed
as though mirth and gaiety were frisking and gambolling all over the
meadow. Several other persons were engaged in erecting raised benches
from which people might conveniently see the plays and dances that
were to be performed the next day on the spot dedicated to the
celebration of the marriage of Camacho the rich and the obsequies of
Basilio. Don Quixote would not enter the village, although the peasant
as well as the bachelor pressed him; he excused himself, however, on
the grounds, amply sufficient in his opinion, that it was the custom
of knights-errant to sleep in the fields and woods in preference to
towns, even were it under gilded ceilings; and so turned aside a
little out of the road, very much against Sancho's will, as the good
quarters he had enjoyed in the castle or house of Don Diego came back
to his mind. CHAPTER XX. WHEREIN AN ACCOUNT IS GIVEN OF THE WEDDING OF
CAMACHO THE RICH, TOGETHER WITH THE INCIDENT OF BASILIO THE POOR
Scarce had the fair Aurora given bright Phoebus time to dry the liquid
pearls upon her golden locks with the heat of his fervent rays, when
Don Quixote, shaking off sloth from his limbs, sprang to his feet and
called to his squire Sancho, who was still snoring; seeing which Don
Quixote ere he roused him thus addressed him: "Happy thou, above all
the dwellers on the face of the earth, that, without envying or being
envied, sleepest with tranquil mind, and that neither enchanters
persecute nor enchantments affright. Sleep, I say, and will say a
hundred times, without any jealous thoughts of thy mistress to make
thee keep ceaseless vigils, or any cares as to how thou art to pay the
debts thou owest, or find to-morrow's food for thyself and thy needy
little family, to interfere with thy repose. Ambition breaks not thy
rest, nor doth this world's empty pomp disturb thee, for the utmost
reach of thy anxiety is to provide for thy ass, since upon my
shoulders thou hast laid the support of thyself, the counterpoise and
burden that nature and custom have imposed upon masters. The servant
sleeps and the master lies awake thinking how he is to feed him,
advance him, and reward him. The distress of seeing the sky turn
brazen, and withhold its needful moisture from the earth, is not felt
by the servant but by the master, who in time of scarcity and famine
must support him who has served him in times of plenty and abundance."
To all this Sancho made no reply because he was asleep, nor would he
have wakened up so soon as he did had not Don Quixote brought him to
his senses with the butt of his lance. He awoke at last, drowsy and
lazy, and casting his eyes about in every direction, observed, "There
comes, if I don't mistake, from the quarter of that arcade a steam and
a smell a great deal more like fried rashers than galingale or thyme;
a wedding that begins with smells like that, by my faith, ought to be
plentiful and unstinting." "Have done, thou glutton," said Don
Quixote; "come, let us go and witness this bridal, and see what the
rejected Basilio does." "Let him do what he likes," returned Sancho;
"be he not poor, he would marry Quiteria. To make a grand match for
himself, and he without a farthing; is there nothing else? Faith,
senor, it's my opinion the poor man should be content with what he can
get, and not go looking for dainties in the bottom of the sea. In the
devil's name, marry, marry, and take this kingdom that comes to hand
without any trouble, and when you are king make me a marquis or
governor of a province, and for the rest let the devil take it all."
Don Quixote, when he heard such blasphemies uttered against his lady
Dulcinea, could not endure it, and lifting his pike, without saying
anything to Sancho or uttering a word, he gave him two such thwacks
that he brought him to the ground; and had it not been that Dorothea
cried out to him to spare him he would have no doubt taken his life on
the spot. "Do you think," he said to him after a pause, "you scurvy
clown, that you are to be always interfering with me, and that you are
to be always offending and I always pardoning? Don't fancy it, impious
scoundrel, for that beyond a doubt thou art, since thou hast set thy
tongue going against the peerless Dulcinea. Know you not, lout,
vagabond, beggar, that were it not for the might that she infuses into
my arm I should not have strength enough to kill a flea? Say, scoffer
with a viper's tongue, what think you has won this kingdom and cut off
this giant's head and made you a marquis (for all this I count as
already accomplished and decided), but the might of Dulcinea,
employing my arm as the instrument of her achievements? She fights in
me and conquers in me, and I live and breathe in her, and owe my life
and being to her. O whoreson scoundrel, how ungrateful you are, you
see yourself raised from the dust of the earth to be a titled lord,
and the return you make for so great a benefit is to speak evil of her
who has conferred it upon you!" Sancho was not so stunned but that he
heard all his master said, and rising with some degree of nimbleness
he ran to place himself behind Dorothea's palfrey, and from that
position he said to his master: "Tell me, senor; if your worship is
resolved not to marry this great princess, it is plain the kingdom
will not be yours; and not being so, how can you bestow favours upon
me? That is what I complain of. Let your worship at any rate marry
this queen, now that we have got her here as if showered down from
heaven, and afterwards you may go back to my lady Dulcinea; for there
must have been kings in the world who kept mistresses. As to beauty, I
have nothing to do with it; and if the truth is to be told, I cannot
persuade myself that the whipping of my backside has anything to do
with the disenchantment of the enchanted; it is like saying, 'If your
head aches rub ointment on your knees;' at any rate I'll make bold to
swear that in all the histories dealing with knight-errantry that your
worship has read you have never come across anybody disenchanted by
whipping; but whether or no I'll whip myself when I have a fancy for
it, and the opportunity serves for scourging myself comfortably." "God
grant it," said Don Quixote; "and heaven give thee grace to take it to
heart and own the obligation thou art under to help my lady, who is
thine also, inasmuch as thou art mine." As they pursued their journey
talking in this way they came to the very same spot where they had
been trampled on by the bulls. Don Quixote recognised it, and said he
to Sancho, "This is the meadow where we came upon those gay
shepherdesses and gallant shepherds who were trying to revive and
imitate the pastoral Arcadia there, an idea as novel as it was happy,
in emulation whereof, if so be thou dost approve of it, Sancho, I
would have ourselves turn shepherds, at any rate for the time I have
to live in retirement. I will buy some ewes and everything else
requisite for the pastoral calling; and, I under the name of the
shepherd Quixotize and thou as the shepherd Panzino, we will roam the
woods and groves and meadows singing songs here, lamenting in elegies
there, drinking of the crystal waters of the springs or limpid brooks
or flowing rivers. The oaks will yield us their sweet fruit with
bountiful hand, the trunks of the hard cork trees a seat, the willows
shade, the roses perfume, the widespread meadows carpets tinted with a
thousand dyes; the clear pure air will give us breath, the moon and
stars lighten the darkness of the night for us, song shall be our
delight, lamenting our joy, Apollo will supply us with verses, and
love with conceits whereby we shall make ourselves famed for ever, not
only in this but in ages to come." "Egad," said Sancho, "but that sort
of life squares, nay corners, with my notions; and what is more the
bachelor Samson Carrasco and Master Nicholas the barber won't have
well seen it before they'll want to follow it and turn shepherds along
with us; and God grant it may not come into the curate's head to join
the sheepfold too, he's so jovial and fond of enjoying himself." "Thou
art in the right of it, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "and I will take
thy advice as to accompanying the princess before going to see
Dulcinea; but I counsel thee not to say anything to any one, or to
those who are with us, about what we have considered and discussed,
for as Dulcinea is so decorous that she does not wish her thoughts to
be known it is not right that I or anyone for me should disclose
them." "Well then, if that be so," said Sancho, "how is it that your
worship makes all those you overcome by your arm go to present
themselves before my lady Dulcinea, this being the same thing as
signing your name to it that you love her and are her lover? And as
those who go must perforce kneel before her and say they come from
your worship to submit themselves to her, how can the thoughts of both
of you be hid?" "O, how silly and simple thou art!" said Don Quixote;
"seest thou not, Sancho, that this tends to her greater exaltation?
For thou must know that according to our way of thinking in chivalry,
it is a high honour to a lady to have many knights-errant in her
service, whose thoughts never go beyond serving her for her own sake,
and who look for no other reward for their great and true devotion
than that she should be willing to accept them as her knights." "It is
with that kind of love," said Sancho, "I have heard preachers say we
ought to love our Lord, for himself alone, without being moved by the
hope of glory or the fear of punishment; though for my part, I would
rather love and serve him for what he could do." "The devil take thee
for a clown!" said Don Quixote, "and what shrewd things thou sayest at
times! One would think thou hadst studied." "In faith, then, I cannot
even read." Master Nicholas here called out to them to wait a while,
as they wanted to halt and drink at a little spring there was there.
Don Quixote drew up, not a little to the satisfaction of Sancho, for
he was by this time weary of telling so many lies, and in dread of his
master catching him tripping, for though he knew that Dulcinea was a
peasant girl of El Toboso, he had never seen her in all his life.
Cardenio had now put on the clothes which Dorothea was wearing when
they found her, and though they were not very good, they were far
better than those he put off. They dismounted together by the side of
the spring, and with what the curate had provided himself with at the
inn they appeased, though not very well, the keen appetite they all of
them brought with them. While they were so employed there happened to
come by a youth passing on his way, who stopping to examine the party
at the spring, the next moment ran to Don Quixote and clasping him
round the legs, began to weep freely, saying, "O, senor, do you not
know me? Look at me well; I am that lad Andres that your worship
released from the oak-tree where I was tied." Don Quixote recognised
him, and taking his hand he turned to those present and said: "That
your worships may see how important it is to have knights-errant to
redress the wrongs and injuries done by tyrannical and wicked men in
this world, I may tell you that some days ago passing through a wood,
I heard cries and piteous complaints as of a person in pain and
distress; I immediately hastened, impelled by my bounden duty, to the
quarter whence the plaintive accents seemed to me to proceed, and I
found tied to an oak this lad who now stands before you, which in my
heart I rejoice at, for his testimony will not permit me to depart
from the truth in any particular. He was, I say, tied to an oak, naked
from the waist up, and a clown, whom I afterwards found to be his
master, was scarifying him by lashes with the reins of his mare. As
soon as I saw him I asked the reason of so cruel a flagellation. The
boor replied that he was flogging him because he was his servant and
because of carelessness that proceeded rather from dishonesty than
stupidity; on which this boy said, 'Senor, he flogs me only because I
ask for my wages.' The master made I know not what speeches and
explanations, which, though I listened to them, I did not accept. In
short, I compelled the clown to unbind him, and to swear he would take
him with him, and pay him real by real, and perfumed into the bargain.
Is not all this true, Andres my son? Didst thou not mark with what
authority I commanded him, and with what humility he promised to do
all I enjoined, specified, and required of him? Answer without
hesitation; tell these gentlemen what took place, that they may see
that it is as great an advantage as I say to have knights-errant
abroad." "All that your worship has said is quite true," answered the
lad; "but the end of the business turned out just the opposite of what
your worship supposes." "How! the opposite?" said Don Quixote; "did
not the clown pay thee then?" "Not only did he not pay me," replied
the lad, "but as soon as your worship had passed out of the wood and
we were alone, he tied me up again to the same oak and gave me a fresh
flogging, that left me like a flayed Saint Bartholomew; and every
stroke he gave me he followed up with some jest or gibe about having
made a fool of your worship, and but for the pain I was suffering I
should have laughed at the things he said. In short he left me in such
a condition that I have been until now in a hospital getting cured of
the injuries which that rascally clown inflicted on me then; for all
which your worship is to blame; for if you had gone your own way and
not come where there was no call for you, nor meddled in other
people's affairs, my master would have been content with giving me one
or two dozen lashes, and would have then loosed me and paid me what he
owed me; but when your worship abused him so out of measure, and gave
him so many hard words, his anger was kindled; and as he could not
revenge himself on you, as soon as he saw you had left him the storm
burst upon me in such a way, that I feel as if I should never be a man
again." "The mischief," said Don Quixote, "lay in my going away; for I
should not have gone until I had seen thee paid; because I ought to
have known well by long experience that there is no clown who will
keep his word if he finds it will not suit him to keep it; but thou
rememberest, Andres, that I swore if he did not pay thee I would go
and seek him, and find him though he were to hide himself in the
whale's belly." "That is true," said Andres; "but it was of no use."
"Thou shalt see now whether it is of use or not," said Don Quixote;
and so saying, he got up hastily and bade Sancho bridle Rocinante, who
was browsing while they were eating. Dorothea asked him what he meant
to do. He replied that he meant to go in search of this clown and
chastise him for such iniquitous conduct, and see Andres paid to the
last maravedi, despite and in the teeth of all the clowns in the
world. To which she replied that he must remember that in accordance
with his promise he could not engage in any enterprise until he had
concluded hers; and that as he knew this better than anyone, he should
restrain his ardour until his return from her kingdom. "That is true,"
said Don Quixote, "and the reason is, that he who is not liable to
offence cannot give offence to anyone. Women, children, and
ecclesiastics, as they cannot defend themselves, though they may
receive offence cannot be insulted, because between the offence and
the insult there is, as your excellence very well knows, this
difference: the insult comes from one who is capable of offering it,
and does so, and maintains it; the offence may come from any quarter
without carrying insult. To take an example: a man is standing
unsuspectingly in the street and ten others come up armed and beat
him; he draws his sword and quits himself like a man, but the number
of his antagonists makes it impossible for him to effect his purpose
and avenge himself; this man suffers an offence but not an insult.
Another example will make the same thing plain: a man is standing with
his back turned, another comes up and strikes him, and after striking
him takes to flight, without waiting an instant, and the other pursues
him but does not overtake him; he who received the blow received an
offence, but not an insult, because an insult must be maintained. If
he who struck him, though he did so sneakingly and treacherously, had
drawn his sword and stood and faced him, then he who had been struck
would have received offence and insult at the same time; offence
because he was struck treacherously, insult because he who struck him
maintained what he had done, standing his ground without taking to
flight. And so, according to the laws of the accursed duel, I may have
received offence, but not insult, for neither women nor children can
maintain it, nor can they wound, nor have they any way of standing
their ground, and it is just the same with those connected with
religion; for these three sorts of persons are without arms offensive
or defensive, and so, though naturally they are bound to defend
themselves, they have no right to offend anybody; and though I said
just now I might have received offence, I say now certainly not, for
he who cannot receive an insult can still less give one; for which
reasons I ought not to feel, nor do I feel, aggrieved at what that
good man said to me; I only wish he had stayed a little longer, that I
might have shown him the mistake he makes in supposing and maintaining
that there are not and never have been any knights-errant in the
world; had Amadis or any of his countless descendants heard him say as
much, I am sure it would not have gone well with his worship." "I will
take my oath of that," said Sancho; "they would have given him a slash
that would have slit him down from top to toe like a pomegranate or a
ripe melon; they were likely fellows to put up with jokes of that
sort! By my faith, I'm certain if Reinaldos of Montalvan had heard the
little man's words he would have given him such a spank on the mouth
that he wouldn't have spoken for the next three years; ay, let him
tackle them, and he'll see how he'll get out of their hands!" The
duchess, as she listened to Sancho, was ready to die with laughter,
and in her own mind she set him down as droller and madder than his
master; and there were a good many just then who were of the same
opinion. Don Quixote finally grew calm, and dinner came to an end, and
as the cloth was removed four damsels came in, one of them with a
silver basin, another with a jug also of silver, a third with two fine
white towels on her shoulder, and the fourth with her arms bared to
the elbows, and in her white hands (for white they certainly were) a
round ball of Naples soap. The one with the basin approached, and with
arch composure and impudence, thrust it under Don Quixote's chin, who,
wondering at such a ceremony, said never a word, supposing it to be
the custom of that country to wash beards instead of hands; he
therefore stretched his out as far as he could, and at the same
instant the jug began to pour and the damsel with the soap rubbed his
beard briskly, raising snow-flakes, for the soap lather was no less
white, not only over the beard, but all over the face, and over the
eyes of the submissive knight, so that they were perforce obliged to
keep shut. The duke and duchess, who had not known anything about
this, waited to see what came of this strange washing. The barber
damsel, when she had him a hand's breadth deep in lather, pretended
that there was no more water, and bade the one with the jug go and
fetch some, while Senor Don Quixote waited. She did so, and Don
Quixote was left the strangest and most ludicrous figure that could be
imagined. All those present, and there were a good many, were watching
him, and as they saw him there with half a yard of neck, and that
uncommonly brown, his eyes shut, and his beard full of soap, it was a
great wonder, and only by great discretion, that they were able to
restrain their laughter. The damsels, the concocters of the joke, kept
their eyes down, not daring to look at their master and mistress; and
as for them, laughter and anger struggled within them, and they knew
not what to do, whether to punish the audacity of the girls, or to
reward them for the amusement they had received from seeing Don
Quixote in such a plight. At length the damsel with the jug returned
and they made an end of washing Don Quixote, and the one who carried
the towels very deliberately wiped him and dried him; and all four
together making him a profound obeisance and curtsey, they were about
to go, when the duke, lest Don Quixote should see through the joke,
called out to the one with the basin saying, "Come and wash me, and
take care that there is water enough." The girl, sharp-witted and
prompt, came and placed the basin for the duke as she had done for Don
Quixote, and they soon had him well soaped and washed, and having
wiped him dry they made their obeisance and retired. It appeared
afterwards that the duke had sworn that if they had not washed him as
they had Don Quixote he would have punished them for their impudence,
which they adroitly atoned for by soaping him as well. Sancho observed
the ceremony of the washing very attentively, and said to himself,
"God bless me, if it were only the custom in this country to wash
squires' beards too as well as knights'. For by God and upon my soul I
have got them on, and I have fallen into the same blunder as he did
who went looking for his ass being all the while mounted on it."
"Didn't I say so?" said Sancho. "I'm a likely one to hide thefts! Why
if I wanted to deal in them, opportunities came ready enough to me in
my government." Don Quixote bowed his head, and saluted the duke and
duchess and all the bystanders, and wheeling Rocinante round, Sancho
following him on Dapple, he rode out of the castle, shaping his course
for Saragossa. CHAPTER LVIII. WHICH TELLS HOW ADVENTURES CAME CROWDING
ON DON QUIXOTE IN SUCH NUMBERS THAT THEY GAVE ONE ANOTHER NO
BREATHING-TIME When Don Quixote saw himself in open country, free, and
relieved from the attentions of Altisidora, he felt at his ease, and
in fresh spirits to take up the pursuit of chivalry once more; and
turning to Sancho he said, "Freedom, Sancho, is one of the most
precious gifts that heaven has bestowed upon men; no treasures that
the earth holds buried or the sea conceals can compare with it; for
freedom, as for honour, life may and should be ventured; and on the
other hand, captivity is the greatest evil that can fall to the lot of
man. I say this, Sancho, because thou hast seen the good cheer, the
abundance we have enjoyed in this castle we are leaving; well then,
amid those dainty banquets and snow-cooled beverages I felt as though
I were undergoing the straits of hunger, because I did not enjoy them
with the same freedom as if they had been mine own; for the sense of
being under an obligation to return benefits and favours received is a
restraint that checks the independence of the spirit. Happy he, to
whom heaven has given a piece of bread for which he is not bound to
give thanks to any but heaven itself!" "For all your worship says,"
said Sancho, "it is not becoming that there should be no thanks on our
part for two hundred gold crowns that the duke's majordomo has given
me in a little purse which I carry next my heart, like a warming
plaster or comforter, to meet any chance calls; for we shan't always
find castles where they'll entertain us; now and then we may light
upon roadside inns where they'll cudgel us." In conversation of this
sort the knight and squire errant were pursuing their journey, when,
after they had gone a little more than half a league, they perceived
some dozen men dressed like labourers stretched upon their cloaks on
the grass of a green meadow eating their dinner. They had beside them
what seemed to be white sheets concealing some objects under them,
standing upright or lying flat, and arranged at intervals. Don Quixote
approached the diners, and, saluting them courteously first, he asked
them what it was those cloths covered. "Senor," answered one of the
party, "under these cloths are some images carved in relief intended
for a retablo we are putting up in our village; we carry them covered
up that they may not be soiled, and on our shoulders that they may not
be broken." "With your good leave," said Don Quixote, "I should like
to see them; for images that are carried so carefully no doubt must be
fine ones." "I should think they were!" said the other; "let the money
they cost speak for that; for as a matter of fact there is not one of
them that does not stand us in more than fifty ducats; and that your
worship may judge; wait a moment, and you shall see with your own
eyes;" and getting up from his dinner he went and uncovered the first
image, which proved to be one of Saint George on horseback with a
serpent writhing at his feet and the lance thrust down its throat with
all that fierceness that is usually depicted. The whole group was one
blaze of gold, as the saying is. On seeing it Don Quixote said, "That
knight was one of the best knights-errant the army of heaven ever
owned; he was called Don Saint George, and he was moreover a defender
of maidens. Let us see this next one." The man uncovered it, and it
was seen to be that of Saint Martin on his horse, dividing his cloak
with the beggar. The instant Don Quixote saw it he said, "This knight
too was one of the Christian adventurers, but I believe he was
generous rather than valiant, as thou mayest perceive, Sancho, by his
dividing his cloak with the beggar and giving him half of it; no doubt
it was winter at the time, for otherwise he would have given him the
whole of it, so charitable was he." "It was not that, most likely,"
said Sancho, "but that he held with the proverb that says, 'For giving
and keeping there's need of brains.'" Don Quixote laughed, and asked
them to take off the next cloth, underneath which was seen the image
of the patron saint of the Spains seated on horseback, his sword
stained with blood, trampling on Moors and treading heads underfoot;
and on seeing it Don Quixote exclaimed, "Ay, this is a knight, and of
the squadrons of Christ! This one is called Don Saint James the
Moorslayer, one of the bravest saints and knights the world ever had
or heaven has now." They then raised another cloth which it appeared
covered Saint Paul falling from his horse, with all the details that
are usually given in representations of his conversion. When Don
Quixote saw it, rendered in such lifelike style that one would have
said Christ was speaking and Paul answering, "This," he said, "was in
his time the greatest enemy that the Church of God our Lord had, and
the greatest champion it will ever have; a knight-errant in life, a
steadfast saint in death, an untiring labourer in the Lord's vineyard,
a teacher of the Gentiles, whose school was heaven, and whose
instructor and master was Jesus Christ himself." There were no more
images, so Don Quixote bade them cover them up again, and said to
those who had brought them, "I take it as a happy omen, brothers, to
have seen what I have; for these saints and knights were of the same
profession as myself, which is the calling of arms; only there is this
difference between them and me, that they were saints, and fought with
divine weapons, and I am a sinner and fight with human ones. They won
heaven by force of arms, for heaven suffereth violence; and I, so far,
know not what I have won by dint of my sufferings; but if my Dulcinea
del Toboso were to be released from hers, perhaps with mended fortunes
and a mind restored to itself I might direct my steps in a better path
than I am following at present." "May God hear and sin be deaf," said
Sancho to this. The men were filled with wonder, as well at the figure
as at the words of Don Quixote, though they did not understand one
half of what he meant by them. They finished their dinner, took their
images on their backs, and bidding farewell to Don Quixote resumed
their journey. Sancho was amazed afresh at the extent of his master's
knowledge, as much as if he had never known him, for it seemed to him
that there was no story or event in the world that he had not at his
fingers' ends and fixed in his memory, and he said to him, "In truth,
master mine, if this that has happened to us to-day is to be called an
adventure, it has been one of the sweetest and pleasantest that have
befallen us in the whole course of our travels; we have come out of it
unbelaboured and undismayed, neither have we drawn sword nor have we
smitten the earth with our bodies, nor have we been left famishing;
blessed be God that he has let me see such a thing with my own eyes!"
"Thou sayest well, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "but remember all times
are not alike nor do they always run the same way; and these things
the vulgar commonly call omens, which are not based upon any natural
reason, will by him who is wise be esteemed and reckoned happy
accidents merely. One of these believers in omens will get up of a
morning, leave his house, and meet a friar of the order of the blessed
Saint Francis, and, as if he had met a griffin, he will turn about and
go home. With another Mendoza the salt is spilt on his table, and
gloom is spilt over his heart, as if nature was obliged to give
warning of coming misfortunes by means of such trivial things as
these. The wise man and the Christian should not trifle with what it
may please heaven to do. Scipio on coming to Africa stumbled as he
leaped on shore; his soldiers took it as a bad omen; but he, clasping
the soil with his arms, exclaimed, 'Thou canst not escape me, Africa,
for I hold thee tight between my arms.' Thus, Sancho, meeting those
images has been to me a most happy occurrence." "I can well believe
it," said Sancho; "but I wish your worship would tell me what is the
reason that the Spaniards, when they are about to give battle, in
calling on that Saint James the Moorslayer, say 'Santiago and close
Spain!' Is Spain, then, open, so that it is needful to close it; or
what is the meaning of this form?" "Thou art very simple, Sancho,"
said Don Quixote; "God, look you, gave that great knight of the Red
Cross to Spain as her patron saint and protector, especially in those
hard struggles the Spaniards had with the Moors; and therefore they
invoke and call upon him as their defender in all their battles; and
in these he has been many a time seen beating down, trampling under
foot, destroying and slaughtering the Hagarene squadrons in the sight
of all; of which fact I could give thee many examples recorded in
truthful Spanish histories." Sancho changed the subject, and said to
his master, "I marvel, senor, at the boldness of Altisidora, the
duchess's handmaid; he whom they call Love must have cruelly pierced
and wounded her; they say he is a little blind urchin who, though
blear-eyed, or more properly speaking sightless, if he aims at a
heart, be it ever so small, hits it and pierces it through and through
with his arrows. I have heard it said too that the arrows of Love are
blunted and robbed of their points by maidenly modesty and reserve;
but with this Altisidora it seems they are sharpened rather than
blunted." "Bear in mind, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "that love is
influenced by no consideration, recognises no restraints of reason,
and is of the same nature as death, that assails alike the lofty
palaces of kings and the humble cabins of shepherds; and when it takes
entire possession of a heart, the first thing it does is to banish
fear and shame from it; and so without shame Altisidora declared her
passion, which excited in my mind embarrassment rather than
commiseration." "Notable cruelty!" exclaimed Sancho; "unheard-of
ingratitude! I can only say for myself that the very smallest loving
word of hers would have subdued me and made a slave of me. The devil!
What a heart of marble, what bowels of brass, what a soul of mortar!
But I can't imagine what it is that this damsel saw in your worship
that could have conquered and captivated her so. What gallant figure
was it, what bold bearing, what sprightly grace, what comeliness of
feature, which of these things by itself, or what all together, could
have made her fall in love with you? For indeed and in truth many a
time I stop to look at your worship from the sole of your foot to the
topmost hair of your head, and I see more to frighten one than to make
one fall in love; moreover I have heard say that beauty is the first
and main thing that excites love, and as your worship has none at all,
I don't know what the poor creature fell in love with." "Recollect,
Sancho," replied Don Quixote, "there are two sorts of beauty, one of
the mind, the other of the body; that of the mind displays and
exhibits itself in intelligence, in modesty, in honourable conduct, in
generosity, in good breeding; and all these qualities are possible and
may exist in an ugly man; and when it is this sort of beauty and not
that of the body that is the attraction, love is apt to spring up
suddenly and violently. I, Sancho, perceive clearly enough that I am
not beautiful, but at the same time I know I am not hideous; and it is
enough for an honest man not to be a monster to be an object of love,
if only he possesses the endowments of mind I have mentioned." While
engaged in this discourse they were making their way through a wood
that lay beyond the road, when suddenly, without expecting anything of
the kind, Don Quixote found himself caught in some nets of green cord
stretched from one tree to another; and unable to conceive what it
could be, he said to Sancho, "Sancho, it strikes me this affair of
these nets will prove one of the strangest adventures imaginable. May
I die if the enchanters that persecute me are not trying to entangle
me in them and delay my journey, by way of revenge for my obduracy
towards Altisidora. Well then let me tell them that if these nets,
instead of being green cord, were made of the hardest diamonds, or
stronger than that wherewith the jealous god of blacksmiths enmeshed
Venus and Mars, I would break them as easily as if they were made of
rushes or cotton threads." But just as he was about to press forward
and break through all, suddenly from among some trees two
shepherdesses of surpassing beauty presented themselves to his
sight--or at least damsels dressed like shepherdesses, save that their
jerkins and sayas were of fine brocade; that is to say, the sayas were
rich farthingales of gold embroidered tabby. Their hair, that in its
golden brightness vied with the beams of the sun itself, fell loose
upon their shoulders and was crowned with garlands twined with green
laurel and red everlasting; and their years to all appearance were not
under fifteen nor above eighteen. Such was the spectacle that filled
Sancho with amazement, fascinated Don Quixote, made the sun halt in
his course to behold them, and held all four in a strange silence. One
of the shepherdesses, at length, was the first to speak and said to
Don Quixote, "Hold, sir knight, and do not break these nets; for they
are not spread here to do you any harm, but only for our amusement;
and as I know you will ask why they have been put up, and who we are,
I will tell you in a few words. In a village some two leagues from
this, where there are many people of quality and rich gentlefolk, it
was agreed upon by a number of friends and relations to come with
their wives, sons and daughters, neighbours, friends and kinsmen, and
make holiday in this spot, which is one of the pleasantest in the
whole neighbourhood, setting up a new pastoral Arcadia among
ourselves, we maidens dressing ourselves as shepherdesses and the
youths as shepherds. We have prepared two eclogues, one by the famous
poet Garcilasso, the other by the most excellent Camoens, in its own
Portuguese tongue, but we have not as yet acted them. Yesterday was
the first day of our coming here; we have a few of what they say are
called field-tents pitched among the trees on the bank of an ample
brook that fertilises all these meadows; last night we spread these
nets in the trees here to snare the silly little birds that startled
by the noise we make may fly into them. If you please to be our guest,
senor, you will be welcomed heartily and courteously, for here just
now neither care nor sorrow shall enter." She held her peace and said
no more, and Don Quixote made answer, "Of a truth, fairest lady,
Actaeon when he unexpectedly beheld Diana bathing in the stream could
not have been more fascinated and wonderstruck than I at the sight of
your beauty. I commend your mode of entertainment, and thank you for
the kindness of your invitation; and if I can serve you, you may
command me with full confidence of being obeyed, for my profession is
none other than to show myself grateful, and ready to serve persons of
all conditions, but especially persons of quality such as your
appearance indicates; and if, instead of taking up, as they probably
do, but a small space, these nets took up the whole surface of the
globe, I would seek out new worlds through which to pass, so as not to
break them; and that ye may give some degree of credence to this
exaggerated language of mine, know that it is no less than Don Quixote
of La Mancha that makes this declaration to you, if indeed it be that
such a name has reached your ears." "Ah! friend of my soul," instantly
exclaimed the other shepherdess, "what great good fortune has befallen
us! Seest thou this gentleman we have before us? Well then let me tell
thee he is the most valiant and the most devoted and the most
courteous gentleman in all the world, unless a history of his
achievements that has been printed and I have read is telling lies and
deceiving us. I will lay a wager that this good fellow who is with him
is one Sancho Panza his squire, whose drolleries none can equal."
"That's true," said Sancho; "I am that same droll and squire you speak
of, and this gentleman is my master Don Quixote of La Mancha, when he
went down into the cave of that enchanted Montesinos, where he found
people to make more of him than if he had been in his own house; for
it seems he came in for a table laid out and a bed ready made. There
he saw fair and pleasant visions, but here I'll see, I imagine, toads
and adders. Unlucky wretch that I am, what an end my follies and
fancies have come to! They'll take up my bones out of this, when it is
heaven's will that I'm found, picked clean, white and polished, and my
good Dapple's with them, and by that, perhaps, it will be found out
who we are, at least by such as have heard that Sancho Panza never
separated from his ass, nor his ass from Sancho Panza. Unlucky
wretches, I say again, that our hard fate should not let us die in our
own country and among our own people, where if there was no help for
our misfortune, at any rate there would be some one to grieve for it
and to close our eyes as we passed away! O comrade and friend, how ill
have I repaid thy faithful services! Forgive me, and entreat Fortune,
as well as thou canst, to deliver us out of this miserable strait we
are both in; and I promise to put a crown of laurel on thy head, and
make thee look like a poet laureate, and give thee double feeds." In
this strain did Sancho bewail himself, and his ass listened to him,
but answered him never a word, such was the distress and anguish the
poor beast found himself in. At length, after a night spent in bitter
moanings and lamentations, day came, and by its light Sancho perceived
that it was wholly impossible to escape out of that pit without help,
and he fell to bemoaning his fate and uttering loud shouts to find out
if there was anyone within hearing; but all his shouting was only
crying in the wilderness, for there was not a soul anywhere in the
neighbourhood to hear him, and then at last he gave himself up for
dead. Dapple was lying on his back, and Sancho helped him to his feet,
which he was scarcely able to keep; and then taking a piece of bread
out of his alforjas which had shared their fortunes in the fall, he
gave it to the ass, to whom it was not unwelcome, saying to him as if
he understood him, "With bread all sorrows are less." And now he
perceived on one side of the pit a hole large enough to admit a person
if he stooped and squeezed himself into a small compass. Sancho made
for it, and entered it by creeping, and found it wide and spacious on
the inside, which he was able to see as a ray of sunlight that
penetrated what might be called the roof showed it all plainly. He
observed too that it opened and widened out into another spacious
cavity; seeing which he made his way back to where the ass was, and
with a stone began to pick away the clay from the hole until in a
short time he had made room for the beast to pass easily, and this
accomplished, taking him by the halter, he proceeded to traverse the
cavern to see if there was any outlet at the other end. He advanced,
sometimes in the dark, sometimes without light, but never without
fear; "God Almighty help me!" said he to himself; "this that is a
misadventure to me would make a good adventure for my master Don
Quixote. He would have been sure to take these depths and dungeons for
flowery gardens or the palaces of Galiana, and would have counted upon
issuing out of this darkness and imprisonment into some blooming
meadow; but I, unlucky that I am, hopeless and spiritless, expect at
every step another pit deeper than the first to open under my feet and
swallow me up for good; 'welcome evil, if thou comest alone.'" In this
way and with these reflections he seemed to himself to have travelled
rather more than half a league, when at last he perceived a dim light
that looked like daylight and found its way in on one side, showing
that this road, which appeared to him the road to the other world, led
to some opening. Here Cide Hamete leaves him, and returns to Don
Quixote, who in high spirits and satisfaction was looking forward to
the day fixed for the battle he was to fight with him who had robbed
Dona Rodriguez's daughter of her honour, for whom he hoped to obtain
satisfaction for the wrong and injury shamefully done to her. It came
to pass, then, that having sallied forth one morning to practise and
exercise himself in what he would have to do in the encounter he
expected to find himself engaged in the next day, as he was putting
Rocinante through his paces or pressing him to the charge, he brought
his feet so close to a pit that but for reining him in tightly it
would have been impossible for him to accomplish it;' but they write
curtly, "Don Paralipomenon of the Three Stars accomplished the
adventure of the six monsters;' without mentioning such a person as
his squire, who was there all the time, just as if there was no such
being. Once more, sirs, I say my master may go alone, and much good
may it do him; and if, as when I was mad I had a share in giving him
the government of an island, so, now that I am in my senses, I could
give him that of a kingdom, it should be his, for the simplicity of
his character and the fidelity of his conduct deserve it." And then,
turning to Sancho, he said, "Forgive me, my friend, that I led thee to
seem as mad as myself, making thee fall into the same error I myself
fell into, that there were and still are knights-errant in the world."
"Ah!" said Sancho weeping, "don't die, master, but take my advice and
live many years; for the foolishest thing a man can do in this life is
to let himself die without rhyme or reason, without anybody killing
him, or any hands but melancholy's making an end of him. Come, don't
be lazy, but get up from your bed and let us take to the fields in
shepherd's trim as we agreed. Perhaps behind some bush we shall find
the lady Dulcinea disenchanted, as fine as fine can be. If it be that
you are dying of vexation at having been vanquished, lay the blame on
me, and say you were overthrown because I had girthed Rocinante badly;
besides you must have seen in your books of chivalry that it is a
common thing for knights to upset one another, and for him who is
conquered to-day to be conqueror tomorrow." "Very true," said Samson,
"and good Sancho Panza's view of these cases is quite right." "Sirs,
not so fast," said Don Quixote, "'in last year's nests there are no
birds this year.' I was mad, now I am in my senses; I was Don Quixote
of La Mancha, I am the Knight of the White Moon, whose unheard-of
achievements will perhaps have recalled him to thy memory. I come to
do battle with thee and prove the might of thy arm, to the end that I
make thee acknowledge and confess that my lady, let her be who she
may, is incomparably fairer than thy Dulcinea del Toboso. If thou dost
acknowledge this fairly and openly, thou shalt escape death and save
me the trouble of inflicting it upon thee; if thou fightest and I
vanquish thee, I demand no other satisfaction than that, laying aside
arms and abstaining from going in quest of adventures, thou withdraw
and betake thyself to thine own village for the space of a year, and
live there without putting hand to sword, in peace and quiet and
beneficial repose, the same being needful for the increase of thy
substance and the salvation of thy soul; and if thou dost vanquish me,
my head shall be at thy disposal, my arms and horse thy spoils, and
the renown of my deeds transferred and added to thine. Consider which
will be thy best course, and give me thy answer speedily, for this day
is all the time I have for the despatch of this business." Don Quixote
was amazed and astonished, as well at the Knight of the White Moon's
arrogance, as at his reason for delivering the defiance, and with calm
dignity he answered him, "Knight of the White Moon, of whose
achievements I have never heard until now, I will venture to swear you
have never seen the illustrious Dulcinea; for had you seen her I know
you would have taken care not to venture yourself upon this issue,
because the sight would have removed all doubt from your mind that
there ever has been or can be a beauty to be compared with hers; and
so, not saying you lie, but merely that you are not correct in what
you state, I accept your challenge, with the conditions you have
proposed, and at once, that the day you have fixed may not expire; and
from your conditions I except only that of the renown of your
achievements being transferred to me, for I know not of what sort they
are nor what they may amount to; I am satisfied with my own, such as
they be. Take, therefore, the side of the field you choose, and I will
do the same; and to whom God shall give it may Saint Peter add his
blessing." The Knight of the White Moon had been seen from the city,
and it was told the viceroy how he was in conversation with Don
Quixote. The viceroy, fancying it must be some fresh adventure got up
by Don Antonio Moreno or some other gentleman of the city, hurried out
at once to the beach accompanied by Don Antonio and several other
gentlemen, just as Don Quixote was wheeling Rocinante round in order
to take up the necessary distance. The viceroy upon this, seeing that
the pair of them were evidently preparing to come to the charge, put
himself between them, asking them what it was that led them to engage
in combat all of a sudden in this way. The Knight of the White Moon
replied that it was a question of precedence of beauty; and briefly
told him what he had said to Don Quixote, and how the conditions of
the defiance agreed upon on both sides had been accepted. The viceroy
went over to Don Antonio, and asked in a low voice did he know who the
Knight of the White Moon was, or was it some joke they were playing on
Don Quixote. Don Antonio replied that he neither knew who he was nor
whether the defiance was in joke or in earnest. This answer left the
viceroy in a state of perplexity, not knowing whether he ought to let
the combat go on or not; but unable to persuade himself that it was
anything but a joke he fell back, saying, "If there be no other way
out of it, gallant knights, except to confess or die, and Don Quixote
is inflexible, and your worship of the White Moon still more so, in
God's hand be it, and fall on." He of the White Moon thanked the
viceroy in courteous and well-chosen words for the permission he gave
them, and so did Don Quixote, who then, commending himself with all
his heart to his lady, imploring her support in that dread pass and
enterprise, and on the way commending himself to God, too, not to
forget him. Sancho who never quitted his side, stretched his neck as
far as he could and peered between the legs of Rocinante to see if he
could now discover what it was that caused him such fear and
apprehension. They went it might be a hundred paces farther, when on
turning a corner the true cause, beyond the possibility of any
mistake, of that dread-sounding and to them awe-inspiring noise that
had kept them all the night in such fear and perplexity, appeared
plain and obvious; and it was (if, reader, thou art not disgusted and
disappointed) six fulling hammers which by their alternate strokes
made all the din. When Don Quixote perceived what it was, he was
struck dumb and rigid from head to foot. Sancho glanced at him and saw
him with his head bent down upon his breast in manifest mortification;
and Don Quixote glanced at Sancho and saw him with his cheeks puffed
out and his mouth full of laughter, and evidently ready to explode
with it, and in spite of his vexation he could not help laughing at
the sight of him; and when Sancho saw his master begin he let go so
heartily that he had to hold his sides with both hands to keep himself
from bursting with laughter. Four times he stopped, and as many times
did his laughter break out afresh with the same violence as at first,
whereat Don Quixote grew furious, above all when he heard him say
mockingly, "Thou must know, friend Sancho, that of Heaven's will I was
born in this our iron age to revive in it the golden or age of gold; I
am he for whom are reserved perils, mighty achievements, valiant
deeds;" and here he went on repeating the words that Don Quixote
uttered the first time they heard the awful strokes. Don Quixote,
then, seeing that Sancho was turning him into ridicule, was so
mortified and vexed that he lifted up his pike and smote him two such
blows that if, instead of catching them on his shoulders, he had
caught them on his head there would have been no wages to pay, unless
indeed to his heirs. Sancho seeing that he was getting an awkward
return in earnest for his jest, and fearing his master might carry it
still further, said to him very humbly, "Calm yourself, sir, for by
God I am only joking." "Well, then, if you are joking I am not,"
replied Don Quixote. "Look here, my lively gentleman, if these,
instead of being fulling hammers, had been some perilous adventure,
have I not, think you, shown the courage required for the attempt and
achievement? Am I, perchance, being, as I am, a gentleman, bound to
know and distinguish sounds and tell whether they come from fulling
mills or not; and that, when perhaps, as is the case, I have never in
my life seen any as you have, low boor as you are, that have been born
and bred among them? But turn me these six hammers into six giants,
and bring them to beard me, one by one or all together, and if I do
not knock them head over heels, then make what mockery you like of
me." "No more of that, senor," returned Sancho; "I own I went a little
too far with the joke. But tell me, your worship, now that peace is
made between us (and may God bring you out of all the adventures that
may befall you as safe and sound as he has brought you out of this
one), was it not a thing to laugh at, and is it not a good story, the
great fear we were in?--at least that I was in; for as to your worship
I see now that you neither know nor understand what either fear or
dismay is." "I do not deny," said Don Quixote, "that what happened to
us may be worth laughing at, but it is not worth making a story about,
for it is not everyone that is shrewd enough to hit the right point of
a thing." "At any rate," said Sancho, "your worship knew how to hit
the right point with your pike, aiming at my head and hitting me on
the shoulders, thanks be to God and my own smartness in dodging it.
But let that pass; all will come out in the scouring; for I have heard
say 'he loves thee well that makes thee weep;' and moreover that it is
the way with great lords after any hard words they give a servant to
give him a pair of breeches; though I do not know what they give after
blows, unless it be that knights-errant after blows give islands, or
kingdoms on the mainland." "It may be on the dice," said Don Quixote,
"that all thou sayest is true; how much, thinkest thou, ought I to
give thee over and above what Tom Carrasco gave thee?" "I think," said
Sancho, "that if your worship was to add on two reals a month I'd
consider myself well paid; that is, as far as the wages of my labour
go; but to make up to me for your worship's pledge and promise to me
to give me the government of an island, it would be fair to add six
reals more, making thirty in all." "Very good," said Don Quixote; "it
is twenty-five days since we left our village, so reckon up, Sancho,
according to the wages you have made out for yourself, and see how
much I owe you in proportion, and pay yourself, as I said before, out
of your own hand." "O body o' me!" said Sancho, "but your worship is
very much out in that reckoning; for when it comes to the promise of
the island we must count from the day your worship promised it to me
to this present hour we are at now." "Well, how long is it, Sancho,
since I promised it to you?" said Don Quixote. "If I remember
rightly," said Sancho, "it must be over twenty years, three days more
or less." Don Quixote gave himself a great slap on the forehead and
began to laugh heartily, and said he, "Why, I have not been wandering,
either in the Sierra Morena or in the whole course of our sallies, but
barely two months, and thou sayest, Sancho, that it is twenty years
since I promised thee the island. I believe now thou wouldst have all
the money thou hast of mine go in thy wages. If so, and if that be thy
pleasure, I give it to thee now, once and for all, and much good may
it do thee, for so long as I see myself rid of such a good-for-nothing
squire I'll be glad to be left a pauper without a rap. But tell me,
thou perverter of the squirely rules of knight-errantry, where hast
thou ever seen or read that any knight-errant's squire made terms with
his lord, 'you must give me so much a month for serving you'? Plunge,
scoundrel, rogue, monster--for such I take thee to be--plunge, I say,
into the mare magnum of their histories; and if thou shalt find that
any squire ever said or thought what thou hast said now, I will let
thee nail it on my forehead, and give me, over and above, four sound
slaps in the face. Turn the rein, or the halter, of thy Dapple, and
begone home; for one single step further thou shalt not make in my
company. O bread thanklessly received! O promises ill-bestowed! O man
more beast than human being! Now, when I was about to raise thee to
such a position, that, in spite of thy wife, they would call thee 'my
lord,' thou art leaving me? Thou art going now when I had a firm and
fixed intention of making thee lord of the best island in the world?
Well, as thou thyself hast said before now, honey is not for the mouth
of the ass," returned Sancho; "all in good time thou shalt see,
wife--nay, thou wilt be surprised to hear thyself called 'your
ladyship' by all thy vassals." "What are you talking about, Sancho,
with your ladyships, islands, and vassals?" returned Teresa Panza--for
so Sancho's wife was called, though they were not relations, for in La
Mancha it is customary for wives to take their husbands' surnames.
"Don't be in such a hurry to know all this, Teresa," said Sancho; "it
is enough that I am telling you the truth, so shut your mouth. But I
may tell you this much by the way, that there is nothing in the world
more delightful than to be a person of consideration, squire to a
knight-errant, and a seeker of adventures. To be sure most of those
one finds do not end as pleasantly as one could wish, for out of a
hundred, ninety-nine will turn out cross and contrary. I know it by
experience, for out of some I came blanketed, and out of others
belaboured. Still, for all that, it is a fine thing to be on the
look-out for what may happen, crossing mountains, searching woods,
climbing rocks, visiting castles, putting up at inns, all at free
quarters, and devil take the maravedi to pay." While this conversation
passed between Sancho Panza and his wife, Don Quixote's housekeeper
and niece took him in and undressed him and laid him in his old bed.
He eyed them askance, and could not make out where he was. The curate
charged his niece to be very careful to make her uncle comfortable and
to keep a watch over him lest he should make his escape from them
again, telling her what they had been obliged to do to bring him home.
On this the pair once more lifted up their voices and renewed their
maledictions upon the books of chivalry, and implored heaven to plunge
the authors of such lies and nonsense into the midst of the bottomless
pit. They were, in short, kept in anxiety and dread lest their uncle
and master should give them the slip the moment he found himself
somewhat better, and as they feared so it fell out. But the author of
this history, though he has devoted research and industry to the
discovery of the deeds achieved by Don Quixote in his third sally, has
been unable to obtain any information respecting them, at any rate
derived from authentic documents; tradition has merely preserved in
the memory of La Mancha the fact that Don Quixote, the third time he
sallied forth from his home, betook himself to Saragossa, where he was
present at some famous jousts which came off in that city, and that he
had adventures there worthy of his valour and high intelligence. Of
his end and death he could learn no particulars, nor would he have
ascertained it or known of it, if good fortune had not produced an old
physician for him who had in his possession a leaden box, which,
according to his account, had been discovered among the crumbling
foundations of an ancient hermitage that was being rebuilt; in which
box were found certain parchment manuscripts in Gothic character, but
in Castilian verse, containing many of his achievements, and setting
forth the beauty of Dulcinea, the form of Rocinante, the fidelity of
Sancho Panza, and the burial of Don Quixote himself, together with
sundry epitaphs and eulogies on his life and character; but all that
could be read and deciphered were those which the trustworthy author
of this new and unparalleled history here presents. And the said
author asks of those that shall read it nothing in return for the vast
toil which it has cost him in examining and searching the Manchegan
archives in order to bring it to light, save that they give him the
same credit that people of sense give to the books of chivalry that
pervade the world and are so popular; for with this he will consider
himself amply paid and fully satisfied, and will be encouraged to seek
out and produce other histories, if not as truthful, at least equal in
invention and not less entertaining. The first words written on the
parchment found in the leaden box were these: THE ACADEMICIANS OF
ARGAMASILLA, A VILLAGE OF LA MANCHA, ON THE LIFE AND DEATH OF DON
QUIXOTE OF LA MANCHA, HOC SCRIPSERUNT MONICONGO, ACADEMICIAN OF
ARGAMASILLA, ON THE TOMB OF DULCINEA DEL TOBOSO EPITAPH Here Dulcinea
lies. Plump was she and robust: Now she is ashes and dust: The end of
all flesh that dies. A lady of high degree, With the port of a lofty
dame, And the great Don Quixote's flame, And the pride of her village
was she. These were all the verses that could be deciphered; the rest,
the writing being worm-eaten, were handed over to one of the
Academicians to make out their meaning conjecturally. We have been
informed that at the cost of many sleepless nights and much toil he
has succeeded, and that he means to publish them in hopes of Don
Quixote's third sally. "Forse altro cantera con miglior plectro." END
OF PART I. === DON QUIXOTE Volume II. Complete by Miguel de Cervantes
Translated by John Ormsby CONTENTS Part II. CHAPTER I OF THE INTERVIEW
THE CURATE AND THE BARBER HAD WITH DON QUIXOTE ABOUT HIS MALADY
CHAPTER II WHICH TREATS OF THE NOTABLE ALTERCATION WHICH SANCHO PANZA
HAD WITH DON QUIXOTE'S NIECE, AND HOUSEKEEPER, TOGETHER WITH OTHER
DROLL MATTERS CHAPTER III OF THE LAUGHABLE CONVERSATION THAT PASSED
BETWEEN DON QUIXOTE, SANCHO PANZA, AND THE BACHELOR SAMSON CARRASCO
Don Quixote remained very deep in thought, waiting for the bachelor
Carrasco, from whom he was to hear how he himself had been put into a
book as Sancho said; and he could not persuade himself that any such
history could be in existence, for the blood of the enemies he had
slain was not yet dry on the blade of his sword, and now they wanted
to make out that his mighty achievements were going about in print.
For all that, he fancied some sage, either a friend or an enemy,
might, by the aid of magic, have given them to the press; if a friend,
in order to magnify and exalt them above the most famous ever achieved
by any knight-errant; if an enemy, to bring them to naught and degrade
them below the meanest ever recorded of any low squire, though as he
said to himself, the achievements of squires never were recorded. If,
however, it were the fact that such a history were in existence, it
must necessarily, being the story of a knight-errant, be
grandiloquent, lofty, imposing, grand and true. With this he comforted
himself somewhat, though it made him uncomfortable to think that the
author was a Moor, judging by the title of "Cide;" and that no truth
was to be looked for from Moors, as they are all impostors, cheats,
and schemers. He was afraid he might have dealt with his love affairs
in some indecorous fashion, that might tend to the discredit and
prejudice of the purity of his lady Dulcinea del Toboso; he would have
had him set forth the fidelity and respect he had always observed
towards her, spurning queens, empresses, and damsels of all sorts, and
keeping in check the impetuosity of his natural impulses. Absorbed and
wrapped up in these and divers other cogitations, he was found by
Sancho and Carrasco, whom Don Quixote received with great courtesy.
The bachelor, though he was called Samson, was of no great bodily
size, but he was a very great wag; he was of a sallow complexion, but
very sharp-witted, somewhere about four-and-twenty years of age, with
a round face, a flat nose, and a large mouth, all indications of a
mischievous disposition and a love of fun and jokes; and of this he
gave a sample as soon as he saw Don Quixote, by falling on his knees
before him and saying, "Let me kiss your mightiness's hand, Senor Don
Quixote of La Mancha, for, by the habit of St. Peter that I wear,
though I have no more than the first four orders, your worship is one
of the most famous knights-errant that have ever been, or will be, all
the world over. A blessing on Cide Hamete Benengeli, who has written
the history of your great deeds, and a double blessing on that
connoisseur who took the trouble of having it translated out of the
Arabic into our Castilian vulgar tongue for the universal
entertainment of the people!" Don Quixote made him rise, and said,
"So, then, it is true that there is a history of me, and that it was a
Moor and a sage who wrote it?" "So true is it, senor," said Samson,
"that my belief is there are more than twelve thousand volumes of the
said history in print this very day. Only ask Portugal, Barcelona, and
Valencia, where they have been printed, and moreover there is a report
that it is being printed at Antwerp, and I am persuaded there will not
be a country or language in which there will not be a translation of
it." "One of the things," here observed Don Quixote, "that ought to
give most pleasure to a virtuous and eminent man is to find himself in
his lifetime in print and in type, familiar in people's mouths with a
good name; I say with a good name, for if it be the opposite, then
there is no death to be compared to it." "If it goes by good name and
fame," said the bachelor, "your worship alone bears away the palm from
all the knights-errant; for the Moor in his own language, and the
Christian in his, have taken care to set before us your gallantry,
your high courage in encountering dangers, your fortitude in
adversity, your patience under misfortunes as well as wounds, the
purity and continence of the platonic loves of your worship and my
lady Dona Dulcinea del Toboso-" "I never heard my lady Dulcinea called
Dona," observed Sancho here; "nothing more than the lady Dulcinea del
Toboso; so here already the history is wrong." "That is not an
objection of any importance," replied Carrasco. "Certainly not," said
Don Quixote; "but tell me, senor bachelor, what deeds of mine are they
that are made most of in this history?" "On that point," replied the
bachelor, "opinions differ, as tastes do; some swear by the adventure
of the windmills that your worship took to be Briareuses and giants;
others by that of the fulling mills; one cries up the description of
the two armies that afterwards took the appearance of two droves of
sheep; another that of the dead body on its way to be buried at
Segovia; a third says the liberation of the galley slaves is the best
of all, and a fourth that nothing comes up to the affair with the
Benedictine giants, and the battle with the valiant Biscayan." "Tell
me, senor bachelor," said Sancho at this point, "does the adventure
with the Yanguesans come in, when our good Rocinante went hankering
after dainties?" "The sage has left nothing in the ink-bottle,"
replied Samson; "he tells all and sets down everything, even to the
capers that worthy Sancho cut in the blanket." "I cut no capers in the
blanket," returned Sancho; "in the air I did, and more of them than I
liked." "There is no human history in the world, I suppose," said Don
Quixote, "that has not its ups and downs, but more than others such as
deal with chivalry, for they can never be entirely made up of
prosperous adventures." "For all that," replied the bachelor, "there
are those who have read the history who say they would have been glad
if the author had left out some of the countless cudgellings that were
inflicted on Senor Don Quixote in various encounters." "That's where
the truth of the history comes in," said Sancho. "At the same time
they might fairly have passed them over in silence," observed Don
Quixote; "for there is no need of recording events which do not change
or affect the truth of a history, if they tend to bring the hero of it
into contempt. AEneas was not in truth and earnest so pious as Virgil
represents him, nor Ulysses so wise as Homer describes him." "That is
true," said Samson; "but it is one thing to write as a poet, another
to write as a historian; the poet may describe or sing things, not as
they were, but as they ought to be, so as to leave the example of
their virtues to posterity. In the same way Amadis was the polestar,
day-star, sun of valiant and devoted knights, whom all we who fight
under the banner of love and chivalry are bound to imitate. This,
then, being so, I consider, friend Sancho, that the knight-errant who
shall imitate him most closely will come nearest to reaching the
perfection of chivalry. Now one of the instances in which this knight
most conspicuously showed his prudence, worth, valour, endurance,
fortitude, and love, was when he withdrew, rejected by the Lady
Oriana, to do penance upon the Pena Pobre, changing his name into that
of Beltenebros, a name assuredly significant and appropriate to the
life which he had voluntarily adopted. So, as it is easier for me to
imitate him in this than in cleaving giants asunder, cutting off
serpents' heads, slaying dragons, routing armies, destroying fleets,
and breaking enchantments, and as this place is so well suited for a
similar purpose, I must not allow the opportunity to escape which now
so conveniently offers me its forelock." "What is it in reality," said
Sancho, "that your worship means to do in such an out-of-the-way place
as this?" "Have I not told thee," answered Don Quixote, "that I mean
to imitate Amadis here, playing the victim of despair, the madman, the
maniac, so as at the same time to imitate the valiant Don Roland, when
at the fountain he had evidence of the fair Angelica having disgraced
herself with Medoro and through grief thereat went mad, and plucked up
trees, troubled the waters of the clear springs, slew destroyed
flocks, burned down huts, levelled houses, dragged mares after him,
and perpetrated a hundred thousand other outrages worthy of
everlasting renown and record? And though I have no intention of
imitating Roland, or Orlando, or Rotolando (for he went by all these
names), step by step in all the mad things he did, said, and thought,
I will make a rough copy to the best of my power of all that seems to
me most essential; but perhaps I shall content myself with the simple
imitation of Amadis, who without giving way to any mischievous madness
but merely to tears and sorrow, gained as much fame as the most
famous." "It seems to me," said Sancho, "that the knights who behaved
in this way had provocation and cause for those follies and penances;
but what cause has your worship for going mad? What lady has rejected
you, or what evidence have you found to prove that the lady Dulcinea
del Toboso has been trifling with Moor or Christian?" "There is the
point," replied Don Quixote, "and that is the beauty of this business
of mine; no thanks to a knight-errant for going mad when he has cause;
the thing is to turn crazy without any provocation, and let my lady
know, if I do this in the dry, what I would do in the moist; moreover
I have abundant cause in the long separation I have endured from my
lady till death, Dulcinea del Toboso; for as thou didst hear that
shepherd Ambrosio say the other day, in absence all ills are felt and
feared; and so, friend Sancho, waste no time in advising me against so
rare, so happy, and so unheard-of an imitation; mad I am, and mad I
must be until thou returnest with the answer to a letter that I mean
to send by thee to my lady Dulcinea; and if it be such as my constancy
deserves, my insanity and penance will come to an end; and if it be to
the opposite effect, I shall become mad in earnest, and, being so, I
shall suffer no more; thus in whatever way she may answer I shall
escape from the struggle and affliction in which thou wilt leave me,
enjoying in my senses the boon thou bearest me, or as a madman not
feeling the evil thou bringest me. But tell me, Sancho, hast thou got
Mambrino's helmet safe? for I saw thee take it up from the ground when
that ungrateful wretch tried to break it in pieces but could not, by
which the fineness of its temper may be seen." To which Sancho made
answer, "By the living God, Sir Knight of the Rueful Countenance, I
say you not only may and ought to do mad freaks for her sake, but you
have a good right to give way to despair and hang yourself; and no one
who knows of it but will say you did well, though the devil should
take you; and I wish I were on my road already, simply to see her, for
it is many a day since I saw her, and she must be altered by this
time, for going about the fields always, and the sun and the air spoil
women's looks greatly. But I must own the truth to your worship, Senor
Don Quixote; until now I have been under a great mistake, for I
believed truly and honestly that the lady Dulcinea must be some
princess your worship was in love with, or some person great enough to
deserve the rich presents you have sent her, such as the Biscayan and
the galley slaves, and many more no doubt, for your worship must have
won many victories in the time when I was not yet your squire. But all
things considered, what good can it do the lady Aldonza Lorenzo, I
mean the lady Dulcinea del Toboso, nor took Don Quixote's letter to
her, for it was left in the memorandum book in the Sierra Morena, how
did he dare to invent the answer and all that about finding her
sifting wheat, the whole story being a deception and falsehood, and so
much to the prejudice of the Empresses and Queens of the Alcarria and
Estremadura, your worship will be pleased to show us some portrait of
this lady, though it be no bigger than a grain of wheat; for by the
thread one gets at the ball, and in this way we shall be satisfied and
easy, and you will be content and pleased; nay, I believe we are
already so far agreed with you that even though her portrait should
show her blind of one eye, and distilling vermilion and sulphur from
the other, we would nevertheless, to gratify your worship, say all in
her favour that you desire." "She distils nothing of the kind, vile
rabble," said Don Quixote, burning with rage, "nothing of the kind, I
say, only ambergris and civet in cotton; nor is she one-eyed or
humpbacked, but straighter than a Guadarrama spindle: but ye must pay
for the blasphemy ye have uttered against beauty like that of my
lady." And so saying, he charged with levelled lance against the one
who had spoken, with such fury and fierceness that, if luck had not
contrived that Rocinante should stumble midway and come down, it would
have gone hard with the rash trader. Down went Rocinante, and over
went his master, rolling along the ground for some distance; and when
he tried to rise he was unable, so encumbered was he with lance,
buckler, spurs, helmet, and the weight of his old armour; and all the
while he was struggling to get up he kept saying, "Fly not, cowards
and caitiffs! stay, for not by my fault, but my horse's, am I
stretched here." One of the muleteers in attendance, who could not
have had much good nature in him, hearing the poor prostrate man
blustering in this style, was unable to refrain from giving him an
answer on his ribs; and coming up to him he seized his lance, and
having broken it in pieces, with one of them he began so to belabour
our Don Quixote that, notwithstanding and in spite of his armour, he
milled him like a measure of wheat. His masters called out not to lay
on so hard and to leave him alone, but the muleteers blood was up, and
he did not care to drop the game until he had vented the rest of his
wrath, and gathering up the remaining fragments of the lance he
finished with a discharge upon the unhappy victim, who all through the
storm of sticks that rained on him never ceased threatening heaven,
and earth, and the brigands, for such they seemed to him. At last the
muleteer was tired, and the traders continued their journey, taking
with them matter for talk about the poor fellow who had been
cudgelled. He when he found himself alone made another effort to rise;
but if he was unable when whole and sound, how was he to rise after
having been thrashed and well-nigh knocked to pieces? And yet he
esteemed himself fortunate, as it seemed to him that this was a
regular knight-errant's mishap, and entirely, he considered, the fault
of his horse. However, battered in body as he was, to rise was beyond
his power. CHAPTER V. IN WHICH THE NARRATIVE OF OUR KNIGHT'S MISHAP IS
CONTINUED Finding, then, that, in fact he could not move, he thought
himself of having recourse to his usual remedy, which was to think of
some passage in his books, and his craze brought to his mind that
about Baldwin and the Marquis of Mantua, when Carloto left him wounded
on the mountain side, a story known by heart by the children, not
forgotten by the young men, and lauded and even believed by the old
folk; and for all that not a whit truer than the miracles of Mahomet.
This seemed to him to fit exactly the case in which he found himself,
so, making a show of severe suffering, he began to roll on the ground
and with feeble breath repeat the very words which the wounded knight
of the wood is said to have uttered: Where art thou, lady mine, that
thou My sorrow dost not rue? Thou canst not know it, lady mine, Or
else thou art untrue. And so he went on with the ballad as far as the
lines: O noble Marquis of Mantua, My Uncle and liege lord! As chance
would have it, when he had got to this line there happened to come by
a peasant from his own village, a neighbour of his, who had been with
a load of wheat to the mill, and he, seeing the man stretched there,
came up to him and asked him who he was and what was the matter with
him that he complained so dolefully. Don Quixote was firmly persuaded
that this was the Marquis of Mantua, his uncle, so the only answer he
made was to go on with his ballad, in which he told the tale of his
misfortune, and of the loves of the Emperor's son and his wife all
exactly as the ballad sings it. The peasant stood amazed at hearing
such nonsense, and relieving him of the visor, already battered to
pieces by blows, he wiped his face, which was covered with dust, and
as soon as he had done so he recognised him and said, "Senor Quixada"
(for so he appears to have been called when he was in his senses and
had not yet changed from a quiet country gentleman into a
knight-errant), "who has brought your worship to this pass?" But to
all questions the other only went on with his ballad. Seeing this, the
good man removed as well as he could his breastplate and backpiece to
see if he had any wound, but he could perceive no blood nor any mark
whatever. He then contrived to raise him from the ground, and with no
little difficulty hoisted him upon his ass, which seemed to him to be
the easiest mount for him; and collecting the arms, even to the
splinters of the lance, he tied them on Rocinante, and leading him by
the bridle and the ass by the halter he took the road for the village,
very sad to hear what absurd stuff Don Quixote was talking. Nor was
Don Quixote less so, for what with blows and bruises he could not sit
upright on the ass, and from time to time he sent up sighs to heaven,
so that once more he drove the peasant to ask what ailed him. And it
could have been only the devil himself that put into his head tales to
match his own adventures, for now, forgetting Baldwin, he bethought
himself of the Moor Abindarraez, when the Alcaide of Antequera,
Rodrigo de Narvaez, took him prisoner and carried him away to his
castle; so that when the peasant again asked him how he was and what
ailed him, he gave him for reply the same words and phrases that the
captive Abindarraez gave to Rodrigo de Narvaez, just as he had read
the story in the "Diana" of Jorge de Montemayor where it is written,
applying it to his own case so aptly that the peasant went along
cursing his fate that he had to listen to such a lot of nonsense; from
which, however, he came to the conclusion that his neighbour was mad,
and so made all haste to reach the village to escape the wearisomeness
of this harangue of Don Quixote's; who, at the end of it, said, "Senor
Don Rodrigo de Narvaez, your worship must know that this fair Xarifa I
have mentioned is now the lovely Dulcinea del Toboso, for whom I have
done, am doing, and will do the most famous deeds of chivalry that in
this world have been seen, are to be seen, or ever shall be seen." To
this the peasant answered, "Senor--sinner that I am!--cannot your
worship see that I am not Don Rodrigo de Narvaez nor the Marquis of
Mantua, but Pedro Alonso your neighbour, and that your worship is
neither Baldwin nor Abindarraez, but the worthy gentleman Senor
Quixada?" "I know who I am," replied Don Quixote, "and I know that I
may be not only those I have named, but all the Twelve Peers of France
and even all the Nine Worthies, since my achievements surpass all that
they have done all together and each of them on his own account." With
this talk and more of the same kind they reached the village just as
night was beginning to fall, but the peasant waited until it was a
little later that the belaboured gentleman might not be seen riding in
such a miserable trim. When it was what seemed to him the proper time
he entered the village and went to Don Quixote's house, which he found
all in confusion, and there were the curate and the village barber,
who were great friends of Don Quixote, and his housekeeper was saying
to them in a loud voice, "What does your worship think can have
befallen my master, Senor Licentiate Pero Perez?" for so the curate
was called; "it is three days now since anything has been seen of him,
or the hack, or the buckler, lance, or armour. Miserable me! I am
certain of it, and it is as true as that I was born to die, that these
accursed books of chivalry he has, and has got into the way of reading
so constantly, have upset his reason; for now I remember having often
heard him saying to himself that he would turn knight-errant and go
all over the world in quest of adventures. To the devil and Barabbas
with such books, that have brought to ruin in this way the finest
understanding there was in all La Mancha!" The niece said the same,
and, more: "You must know, Master Nicholas"--for that was the name of
the barber--"it was often my uncle's way to stay two days and nights
together poring over these unholy books of misventures, after which he
would fling the book away and snatch up his sword and fall to slashing
the walls; and when he was tired out he would say he had killed four
giants like four towers; and the sweat that flowed from him when he
was weary he said was the blood of the wounds he had received in
battle; and then he would drink a great jug of cold water and become
calm and quiet, saying that this water was a most precious potion
which the sage Esquife, a great magician and friend of his, had
brought him. But I take all the blame upon myself for never having
told your worships of my uncle's vagaries, that you might put a stop
to them before things had come to this pass, and burn all these
accursed books--for he has a great number--that richly deserve to be
burned like heretics." "So say I too," said the curate, "and by my
faith to-morrow shall not pass without public judgment upon them, and
may they be condemned to the flames lest they lead those that read to
behave as my good friend seems to have behaved." All this the peasant
heard, and from it he understood at last what was the matter with his
neighbour, so he began calling aloud, "Open, your worships, to Senor
Baldwin and to Senor the Marquis of Mantua, who comes badly wounded,
and to Senor Abindarraez, the Moor, whom the valiant Rodrigo de
Narvaez, the Alcaide of Antequera, brings captive." At these words
they all hurried out, and when they recognised their friend, master,
and uncle, who had not yet dismounted from the ass because he could
not, they ran to embrace him. "Hold!" said he, "for I am badly wounded
through my horse's fault; carry me to bed, and if possible send for
the wise Urganda to cure and see to my wounds." "See there! plague on
it!" cried the housekeeper at this: "did not my heart tell the truth
as to which foot my master went lame of? To bed with your worship at
once, and we will contrive to cure you here without fetching that
Hurgada. A curse I say once more, and a hundred times more, on those
books of chivalry that have brought your worship to such a pass." They
carried him to bed at once, and after searching for his wounds could
find none, but he said they were all bruises from having had a severe
fall with his horse Rocinante when in combat with ten giants, the
biggest and the boldest to be found on earth. "So, so!" said the
curate, "are there giants in the dance? By the sign of the Cross I
will burn them to-morrow before the day over." They put a host of
questions to Don Quixote, but his only answer to all was--give him
something to eat, and leave him to sleep, for that was what he needed
most. They did so, and the curate questioned the peasant at great
length as to how he had found Don Quixote. He told him, and the
nonsense he had talked when found and on the way home, all which made
the licentiate the more eager to do what he did the next day, which
was to summon his friend the barber, Master Nicholas, and go with him
to Don Quixote's house. CHAPTER VI. OF THE DIVERTING AND IMPORTANT
SCRUTINY WHICH THE CURATE AND THE BARBER MADE IN THE LIBRARY OF OUR
INGENIOUS GENTLEMAN He was still sleeping; so the curate asked the
niece for the keys of the room where the books, the authors of all the
mischief, were, and right willingly she gave them. They all went in,
the housekeeper with them, and found more than a hundred volumes of
big books very well bound, and some other small ones. The moment the
housekeeper saw them she turned about and ran out of the room, and
came back immediately with a saucer of holy water and a sprinkler,
saying, "Here, your worship, senor licentiate, sprinkle this room;
don't leave any magician of the many there are in these books to
bewitch us in revenge for our design of banishing them from the
world." The simplicity of the housekeeper made the licentiate laugh,
and he directed the barber to give him the books one by one to see
what they were about, as there might be some to be found among them
that did not deserve the penalty of fire. "No," said the niece, "there
is no reason for showing mercy to any of them; they have every one of
them done mischief; better fling them out of the window into the court
and make a pile of them and set fire to them; or else carry them into
the yard, and there a bonfire can be made without the smoke giving any
annoyance." The housekeeper said the same, so eager were they both for
the slaughter of those innocents, but the curate would not agree to it
without first reading at any rate the titles. The first that Master
Nicholas put into his hand was "The four books of Amadis of Gaul."
"This seems a mysterious thing," said the curate, "for, as I have
heard say, this was the first book of chivalry printed in Spain, and
from this all the others derive their birth and origin; so it seems to
me that we ought inexorably to condemn it to the flames as the founder
of so vile a sect." "Nay, sir," said the barber, "I too, have heard
say that this is the best of all the books of this kind that have been
written, and so, as something singular in its line, it ought to be
pardoned." "True," said the curate; "and for that reason those who
have hitherto written books of the sort deserve all the more censure
for writing without paying any attention to good taste or the rules of
art, by which they might guide themselves and become as famous in
prose as the two princes of Greek and Latin poetry are in verse." "I
myself, at any rate," said the canon, "was once tempted to write a
book of chivalry in which all the points I have mentioned were to be
observed; and if I must own the truth I have more than a hundred
sheets written; and to try if it came up to my own opinion of it, I
showed them to persons who were fond of this kind of reading, to
learned and intelligent men as well as to ignorant people who cared
for nothing but the pleasure of listening to nonsense, and from all I
obtained flattering approval; nevertheless I proceeded no farther with
it, as well because it seemed to me an occupation inconsistent with my
profession, as because I perceived that the fools are more numerous
than the wise; and, though it is better to be praised by the wise few
than applauded by the foolish many, I have no mind to submit myself to
the stupid judgment of the silly public, to whom the reading of such
books falls for the most part. "But what most of all made me hold my
hand and even abandon all idea of finishing it was an argument I put
to myself taken from the plays that are acted now-a-days, which was in
this wise: if those that are now in vogue, as well those that are pure
invention as those founded on history, are, all or most of them,
downright nonsense and things that have neither head nor tail, like
that affair of the answer to the letter, and that other of six or
eight days ago, which is not yet in history, that is to say, the
affair of the enchantment of my lady Dulcinea; for I made him believe
she is enchanted, though there's no more truth in it than over the
hills of Ubeda." The duchess begged him to tell her about the
enchantment or deception, so Sancho told the whole story exactly as it
had happened, and his hearers were not a little amused by it; and then
resuming, the duchess said, "In consequence of what worthy Sancho has
told me, a doubt starts up in my mind, and there comes a kind of
whisper to my ear that says, 'If Don Quixote be mad, crazy, and
cracked, and Sancho Panza his squire knows it, and, notwithstanding,
serves and follows him, and goes trusting to his empty promises, there
can be no doubt he must be still madder and sillier than his master;
and that being so, it will be cast in your teeth, senora duchess, if
you give the said Sancho an island to govern; for how will he who does
not know how to govern himself know how to govern others?'" "By God,
senora," said Sancho, "but that doubt comes timely; but your grace may
say it out, and speak plainly, or as you like; for I know what you say
is true, and if I were wise I should have left my master long ago; but
this was my fate, this was my bad luck; I can't help it, I must follow
him; we're from the same village, I've eaten his bread, I'm fond of
him, I'm grateful, he gave me his ass-colts, and above all I'm
faithful; so it's quite impossible for anything to separate us, except
the pickaxe and shovel. And if your highness does not like to give me
the island because I'm a fool, like a wise man I will take care to
give myself no trouble about it; I have heard say that 'behind the
cross there's the devil,' and that 'all that glitters is not gold,'
and that from among the oxen, and the ploughs, and the yokes, Wamba
the husbandman was taken to be made King of Spain, and from among
brocades, and pleasures, and riches, Roderick was taken to be devoured
by adders, if the verses of the old ballads don't lie." "To be sure
they don't lie!" exclaimed Dona Rodriguez, the duenna, who was one of
the listeners. "Why, there's a ballad that says they put King Rodrigo
alive into a tomb full of toads, and adders, and lizards, and that two
days afterwards the king, in a plaintive, feeble voice, cried out from
within the tomb-- They gnaw me now, they gnaw me now, There where I
most did sin. And according to that the gentleman has good reason to
say he would rather be a labouring man than a king, if vermin are to
eat him." The duchess could not help laughing at the simplicity of her
duenna, or wondering at the language and proverbs of Sancho, to whom
she said, "Worthy Sancho knows very well that when once a knight has
made a promise he strives to keep it, though it should cost him his
life. But now Don Fernando's friends, as well as the curate and the
barber, who had been present all the while, not forgetting the worthy
Sancho Panza, ran forward and gathered round Don Fernando, entreating
him to have regard for the tears of Dorothea, and not suffer her
reasonable hopes to be disappointed, since, as they firmly believed,
what she said was but the truth; and bidding him observe that it was
not, as it might seem, by accident, but by a special disposition of
Providence that they had all met in a place where no one could have
expected a meeting. And the curate bade him remember that only death
could part Luscinda from Cardenio; that even if some sword were to
separate them they would think their death most happy; and that in a
case that admitted of no remedy his wisest course was, by conquering
and putting a constraint upon himself, to show a generous mind, and of
his own accord suffer these two to enjoy the happiness Heaven had
granted them. He bade him, too, turn his eyes upon the beauty of
Dorothea and he would see that few if any could equal much less excel
her; while to that beauty should be added her modesty and the
surpassing love she bore him. But besides all this, he reminded him
that if he prided himself on being a gentleman and a Christian, he
could not do otherwise than keep his plighted word; and that in doing
so he would obey God and meet the approval of all sensible people, who
know and recognised it to be the privilege of beauty, even in one of
humble birth, provided virtue accompany it, to be able to raise itself
to the level of any rank, without any slur upon him who places it upon
an equality with himself; and furthermore that when the potent sway of
passion asserts itself, so long as there be no mixture of sin in it,
he is not to be blamed who gives way to it. To be brief, they added to
these such other forcible arguments that Don Fernando's manly heart,
being after all nourished by noble blood, was touched, and yielded to
the truth which, even had he wished it, he could not gainsay; and he
showed his submission, and acceptance of the good advice that had been
offered to him, by stooping down and embracing Dorothea, saying to
her, "Rise, dear lady, it is not right that what I hold in my heart
should be kneeling at my feet; and if until now I have shown no sign
of what I own, it may have been by Heaven's decree in order that,
seeing the constancy with which you love me, I may learn to value you
as you deserve. What I entreat of you is that you reproach me not with
my transgression and grievous wrong-doing; for the same cause and
force that drove me to make you mine impelled me to struggle against
being yours; and to prove this, turn and look at the eyes of the now
happy Luscinda, and you will see in them an excuse for all my errors:
and as she has found and gained the object of her desires, and I have
found in you what satisfies all my wishes, may she live in peace and
contentment as many happy years with her Cardenio, as on my knees I
pray Heaven to allow me to live with my Dorothea;" and with these
words he once more embraced her and pressed his face to hers with so
much tenderness that he had to take great heed to keep his tears from
completing the proof of his love and repentance in the sight of all.
Not so Luscinda, and Cardenio, and almost all the others, for they
shed so many tears, some in their own happiness, some at that of the
others, that one would have supposed a heavy calamity had fallen upon
them all. Even Sancho Panza was weeping; though afterwards he said he
only wept because he saw that Dorothea was not as he fancied the queen
Micomicona, of whom he expected such great favours. Their wonder as
well as their weeping lasted some time, and then Cardenio and Luscinda
went and fell on their knees before Don Fernando, returning him thanks
for the favour he had rendered them in language so grateful that he
knew not how to answer them, and raising them up embraced them with
every mark of affection and courtesy. He then asked Dorothea how she
had managed to reach a place so far removed from her own home, and she
in a few fitting words told all that she had previously related to
Cardenio, with which Don Fernando and his companions were so delighted
that they wished the story had been longer; so charmingly did Dorothea
describe her misadventures. When she had finished Don Fernando
recounted what had befallen him in the city after he had found in
Luscinda's bosom the paper in which she declared that she was
Cardenio's wife, and never could be his. He said he meant to kill her,
and would have done so had not Montesinos recommended me not to take
the trouble as it would be useless, particularly as the time was
drawing near when it would be necessary for me to quit the cavern. He
told me, moreover, that in course of time he would let me know how he
and Belerma, and Durandarte, and all who were there, were to be
disenchanted. But of all I saw and observed down there, what gave me
most pain was, that while Montesinos was speaking to me, one of the
two companions of the hapless Dulcinea approached me on one without my
having seen her coming, and with tears in her eyes said to him
hurriedly, 'Brother, if you are, as you seem to be, a Christian, for
the love of God I entreat you to have this letter despatched without a
moment's delay to the place and person named in the address, all which
is well known, and by this you will render a great service to our
Lord; and that you may be at no inconvenience in doing so take what is
in this handkerchief;' and said he, 'with this she threw me a
handkerchief out of the window in which were tied up a hundred reals
and this gold ring which I bring here together with the letter I have
given you. And then without waiting for any answer she left the
window, though not before she saw me take the letter and the
handkerchief, and I had by signs let her know that I would do as she
bade me; and so, seeing myself so well paid for the trouble I would
have in bringing it to you, and knowing by the address that it was to
you it was sent (for, senor, I know you very well), and also unable to
resist that beautiful lady's tears, I resolved to trust no one else,
but to come myself and give it to you, and in sixteen hours from the
time when it was given me I have made the journey, which, as you know,
is eighteen leagues.' "All the while the good-natured improvised
courier was telling me this, I hung upon his words, my legs trembling
under me so that I could scarcely stand. However, I opened the letter
and read these words: "'The promise Don Fernando gave you to urge your
father to speak to mine, he has fulfilled much more to his own
satisfaction than to your advantage. I have to tell you, senor, that
he has demanded me for a wife, and my father, led away by what he
considers Don Fernando's superiority over you, has favoured his suit
so cordially, that in two days hence the betrothal is to take place
with such secrecy and so privately that the only witnesses are to be
the Heavens above and a few of the household. Picture to yourself the
state I am in; judge if it be urgent for you to come; the issue of the
affair will show you whether I love you or not. God grant this may
come to your hand before mine shall be forced to link itself with his
who keeps so ill the faith that he has pledged.' "Such, in brief, were
the words of the letter, words that made me set out at once without
waiting any longer for reply or money; for I now saw clearly that it
was not the purchase of horses but of his own pleasure that had made
Don Fernando send me to his brother. The exasperation I felt against
Don Fernando, joined with the fear of losing the prize I had won by so
many years of love and devotion, lent me wings; so that almost flying
I reached home the same day, by the hour which served for speaking
with Luscinda. I arrived unobserved, and left the mule on which I had
come at the house of the worthy man who had brought me the letter, and
fortune was pleased to be for once so kind that I found Luscinda at
the grating that was the witness of our loves. She recognised me at
once, and I her, but not as she ought to have recognised me, or I her.
But who is there in the world that can boast of having fathomed or
understood the wavering mind and unstable nature of a woman? Of a
truth no one. To proceed: as soon as Luscinda saw me she said,
'Cardenio, I am in my bridal dress, and the treacherous Don Fernando
and my covetous father are waiting for me in the hall with the other
witnesses, who shall be the witnesses of my death before they witness
my betrothal. Be not distressed, my friend, but contrive to be present
at this sacrifice, and if that cannot be prevented by my words, I have
a dagger concealed which will prevent more deliberate violence,
putting an end to my life and giving thee a first proof of the love I
have borne and bear thee.' I replied to her distractedly and hastily,
in fear lest I should not have time to reply, 'May thy words be
verified by thy deeds, lady; and if thou hast a dagger to save thy
honour, I have a sword to defend thee or kill myself if fortune be
against us.' "I think she could not have heard all these words, for I
perceived that they called her away in haste, as the bridegroom was
waiting. Now the night of my sorrow set in, the sun of my happiness
went down, I felt my eyes bereft of sight, my mind of reason. I could
not enter the house, nor was I capable of any movement; but reflecting
how important it was that I should be present at what might take place
on the occasion, I nerved myself as best I could and went in, for I
well knew all the entrances and outlets; and besides, with the
confusion that in secret pervaded the house no one took notice of me,
so, without being seen, I found an opportunity of placing myself in
the recess formed by a window of the hall itself, and concealed by the
ends and borders of two tapestries, from between which I could,
without being seen, see all that took place in the room. Who could
describe the agitation of heart I suffered as I stood there--the
thoughts that came to me--the reflections that passed through my mind?
They were such as cannot be, nor were it well they should be, told.
Suffice it to say that the bridegroom entered the hall in his usual
dress, without ornament of any kind; as groomsman he had with him a
cousin of Luscinda's and except the servants of the house there was no
one else in the chamber. Soon afterwards Luscinda came out from an
antechamber, attended by her mother and two of her damsels, arrayed
and adorned as became her rank and beauty, and in full festival and
ceremonial attire. My anxiety and distraction did not allow me to
observe or notice particularly what she wore; I could only perceive
the colours, which were crimson and white, and the glitter of the gems
and jewels on her head dress and apparel, surpassed by the rare beauty
of her lovely auburn hair that vying with the precious stones and the
light of the four torches that stood in the hall shone with a brighter
gleam than all. Oh memory, mortal foe of my peace! why bring before me
now the incomparable beauty of that adored enemy of mine? Were it not
better, cruel memory, to remind me and recall what she then did, that
stirred by a wrong so glaring I may seek, if not vengeance now, at
least to rid myself of life? Be not weary, sirs, of listening to these
digressions; my sorrow is not one of those that can or should be told
tersely and briefly, for to me each incident seems to call for many
words." To this the curate replied that not only were they not weary
of listening to him, but that the details he mentioned interested them
greatly, being of a kind by no means to be omitted and deserving of
the same attention as the main story. "To proceed, then," continued
Cardenio: "all being assembled in the hall, the priest of the parish
came in and as he took the pair by the hand to perform the requisite
ceremony, at the words, 'Will you, Senora Luscinda, take Senor Don
Fernando, here present, for your lawful husband, as the holy Mother
Church ordains?' I thrust my head and neck out from between the
tapestries, and with eager ears and throbbing heart set myself to
listen to Luscinda's answer, awaiting in her reply the sentence of
death or the grant of life. Oh, that I had but dared at that moment to
rush forward crying aloud, 'Luscinda, Luscinda! have a care what thou
dost; remember what thou owest me; bethink thee thou art mine and
canst not be another's; reflect that thy utterance of "Yes" and the
end of my life will come at the same instant. O, treacherous Don
Fernando! robber of my glory, death of my life! What seekest thou?
Remember that thou canst not as a Christian attain the object of thy
wishes, for Luscinda is my bride, and I am her husband!' Fool that I
am! now that I am far away, and out of danger, I say I should have
done what I did not do: now that I have allowed my precious treasure
to be robbed from me, I curse the robber, on whom I might have taken
vengeance had I as much heart for it as I have for bewailing my fate;
in short, as I was then a coward and a fool, little wonder is it if I
am now dying shame-stricken, remorseful, and mad. "The priest stood
waiting for the answer of Luscinda, who for a long time withheld it;
and just as I thought she was taking out the dagger to save her
honour, or struggling for words to make some declaration of the truth
on my behalf, I heard her say in a faint and feeble voice, 'I will:'
Don Fernando said the same, and giving her the ring they stood linked
by a knot that could never be loosed. The bridegroom then approached
to embrace his bride; and she, pressing her hand upon her heart, fell
fainting in her mother's arms. It only remains now for me to tell you
the state I was in when in that consent that I heard I saw all my
hopes mocked, the words and promises of Luscinda proved falsehoods,
and the recovery of the prize I had that instant lost rendered
impossible for ever. I stood stupefied, wholly abandoned, it seemed,
by Heaven, declared the enemy of the earth that bore me, the air
refusing me breath for my sighs, the water moisture for my tears; it
was only the fire that gathered strength so that my whole frame glowed
with rage and jealousy. They were all thrown into confusion by
Luscinda's fainting, and as her mother was unlacing her to give her
air a sealed paper was discovered in her bosom which Don Fernando
seized at once and began to read by the light of one of the torches.
As soon as he had read it he seated himself in a chair, leaning his
cheek on his hand in the attitude of one deep in thought, without
taking any part in the efforts that were being made to recover his
bride from her fainting fit. "Seeing all the household in confusion, I
ventured to come out regardless whether I were seen or not, and
determined, if I were, to do some frenzied deed that would prove to
all the world the righteous indignation of my breast in the punishment
of the treacherous Don Fernando, and even in that of the fickle
fainting traitress. But my fate, doubtless reserving me for greater
sorrows, if such there be, so ordered it that just then I had enough
and to spare of that reason which has since been wanting to me; and
so, without seeking to take vengeance on my greatest enemies (which
might have been easily taken, as all thought of me was so far from
their minds), I resolved to take it upon myself, and on myself to
inflict the pain they deserved, perhaps with even greater severity
than I should have dealt out to them had I then slain them; for sudden
pain is soon over, but that which is protracted by tortures is ever
slaying without ending life. In a word, I quitted the house and
reached that of the man with whom I had left my mule; I made him
saddle it for me, mounted without bidding him farewell, and rode out
of the city, like another Lot, not daring to turn my head to look back
upon it; and when I found myself alone in the open country, screened
by the darkness of the night, and tempted by the stillness to give
vent to my grief without apprehension or fear of being heard or seen,
then I broke silence and lifted up my voice in maledictions upon
Luscinda and Don Fernando, as if I could thus avenge the wrong they
had done me. I called her cruel, ungrateful, false, thankless, but
above all covetous, since the wealth of my enemy had blinded the eyes
of her affection, and turned it from me to transfer it to one to whom
fortune had been more generous and liberal. And yet, in the midst of
this outburst of execration and upbraiding, I found excuses for her,
saying it was no wonder that a young girl in the seclusion of her
parents' house, trained and schooled to obey them always, should have
been ready to yield to their wishes when they offered her for a
husband a gentleman of such distinction, wealth, and noble birth, that
if she had refused to accept him she would have been thought out of
her senses, or to have set her affection elsewhere, a suspicion
injurious to her fair name and fame. But then again, I said, had she
declared I was her husband, they would have seen that in choosing me
she had not chosen so ill but that they might excuse her, for before
Don Fernando had made his offer, they themselves could not have
desired, if their desires had been ruled by reason, a more eligible
husband for their daughter than I was; and she, before taking the last
fatal step of giving her hand, might easily have said that I had
already given her mine, for I should have come forward to support any
assertion of hers to that effect. In short, I came to the conclusion
that feeble love, little reflection, great ambition, and a craving for
rank, had made her forget the words with which she had deceived me,
encouraged and supported by my firm hopes and honourable passion.
"Thus soliloquising and agitated, I journeyed onward for the remainder
of the night, and by daybreak I reached one of the passes of these
mountains, among which I wandered for three days more without taking
any path or road, until I came to some meadows lying on I know not
which side of the mountains, and there I inquired of some herdsmen in
what direction the most rugged part of the range lay. They told me
that it was in this quarter, and I at once directed my course hither,
intending to end my life here; but as I was making my way among these
crags, my mule dropped dead through fatigue and hunger, or, as I think
more likely, in order to have done with such a worthless burden as it
bore in me. I was left on foot, worn out, famishing, without anyone to
help me or any thought of seeking help: and so thus I lay stretched on
the ground, how long I know not, after which I rose up free from
hunger, and found beside me some goatherds, who no doubt were the
persons who had relieved me in my need, for they told me how they had
found me, and how I had been uttering ravings that showed plainly I
had lost my reason; and since then I am conscious that I am not always
in full possession of it, but at times so deranged and crazed that I
do a thousand mad things, tearing my clothes, crying aloud in these
solitudes, cursing my fate, and idly calling on the dear name of her
who is my enemy, and only seeking to end my life in lamentation; and
when I recover my senses I find myself so exhausted and weary that I
can scarcely move. Most commonly my dwelling is the hollow of a cork
tree large enough to shelter this miserable body; the herdsmen and
goatherds who frequent these mountains, moved by compassion, furnish
me with food, leaving it by the wayside or on the rocks, where they
think I may perhaps pass and find it; and so, even though I may be
then out of my senses, the wants of nature teach me what is required
to sustain me, and make me crave it and eager to take it. At other
times, so they tell me when they find me in a rational mood, I sally
out upon the road, and though they would gladly give it me, I snatch
food by force from the shepherds bringing it from the village to their
huts. Thus do pass the wretched life that remains to me, until it be
Heaven's will to bring it to a close, or so to order my memory that I
no longer recollect the beauty and treachery of Luscinda, or the wrong
done me by Don Fernando; for if it will do this without depriving me
of life, I will turn my thoughts into some better channel; if not, I
can only implore it to have full mercy on my soul, for in myself I
feel no power or strength to release my body from this strait in which
I have of my own accord chosen to place it. "Such, sirs, is the dismal
story of my misfortune: say if it be one that can be told with less
emotion than you have seen in me; and do not trouble yourselves with
urging or pressing upon me what reason suggests as likely to serve for
my relief, for it will avail me as much as the medicine prescribed by
a wise physician avails the sick man who will not take it. I have no
wish for health without Luscinda; and since it is her pleasure to be
another's, when she is or should be mine, let it be mine to be a prey
to misery when I might have enjoyed happiness. She by her fickleness
strove to make my ruin irretrievable; I will strive to gratify her
wishes by seeking destruction; and it will show generations to come
that I alone was deprived of that of which all others in misfortune
have a superabundance, for to them the impossibility of being consoled
is itself a consolation, while to me it is the cause of greater
sorrows and sufferings, for I think that even in death there will not
be an end of them." Here Cardenio brought to a close his long
discourse and story, as full of misfortune as it was of love; but just
as the curate was going to address some words of comfort to him, he
was stopped by a voice that reached his ear, saying in melancholy
tones what will be told in the Fourth Part of this narrative; for at
this point the sage and sagacious historian, Cide Hamete Benengeli,
brought the Third to a conclusion. CHAPTER XXVIII. WHICH TREATS OF THE
STRANGE AND DELIGHTFUL ADVENTURE THAT BEFELL THE CURATE AND THE BARBER
IN THE SAME SIERRA Happy and fortunate were the times when that most
daring knight Don Quixote of La Mancha was sent into the world; for by
reason of his having formed a resolution so honourable as that of
seeking to revive and restore to the world the long-lost and almost
defunct order of knight-errantry, we now enjoy in this age of ours, so
poor in light entertainment, not only the charm of his veracious
history, but also of the tales and episodes contained in it which are,
in a measure, no less pleasing, ingenious, and truthful, than the
history itself; which, resuming its thread, carded, spun, and wound,
relates that just as the curate was going to address some words of
comfort to him, he was stopped by a voice that reached his ear, saying
in melancholy tones what will be told in the Fourth Part of this
narrative; for at this point the sage and sagacious historian, Cide
Hamete Benengeli, brought the Third to a conclusion. CHAPTER XXVIII.
WHICH TREATS OF THE STRANGE AND DELIGHTFUL ADVENTURE THAT BEFELL THE
CURATE AND THE BARBER IN THE SAME SIERRA Happy and fortunate were the
times when that most daring knight Don Quixote of La Mancha was sent
into the world; for by reason of his having formed a resolution so
honourable as that of seeking to revive and restore to the world the
long-lost and almost defunct order of knight-errantry, we now enjoy in
this age of ours, so poor in light entertainment, not only the charm
of his veracious history, but also of the tales and episodes contained
in it which are, in a measure, no less pleasing, ingenious, and
truthful, than the history itself; which, resuming its thread, carded,
spun, and wound, relates that just as the curate was going to address
some words of comfort to him, he was stopped by a voice that reached
his ear, saying in melancholy tones what will be told in the Fourth
Part of this narrative; for at this point the sage and sagacious
historian, Cide Hamete Benengeli, brought the Third to a conclusion.
CHAPTER XXVIII. WHICH TREATS OF THE STRANGE AND DELIGHTFUL ADVENTURE
THAT BEFELL THE CURATE AND THE BARBER IN THE SAME SIERRA Happy and
fortunate were the times when that most daring knight Don Quixote of
La Mancha was sent into the world; for by reason of his having formed
a resolution so honourable as that of seeking to revive and restore to
the world the long-lost and almost defunct order of knight-errantry,
we now enjoy in this age of ours, so poor in light entertainment, not
only the charm of his veracious history, but also of the tales and
episodes contained in it which are, in a measure, no less pleasing,
ingenious, and truthful, than the history itself; which, resuming its
thread, carded, spun, and wound, relates that just as the curate was
going to offer consolation to Cardenio, he was interrupted by a voice
that fell upon his ear saying in plaintive tones: "O God! is it
possible I have found a place that may serve as a secret grave for the
weary load of this body that I support so unwillingly? If the solitude
these mountains promise deceives me not, it is so; ah! woe is me! how
much more grateful to my mind will be the society of these rocks and
brakes that permit me to complain of my misfortune to Heaven, than
that of any human being, for there is none on earth to look to for
counsel in doubt, comfort in sorrow, or relief in distress!" All this
was heard distinctly by the curate and those with him, and as it
seemed to them to be uttered close by, as indeed it was, they got up
to look for the speaker, and before they had gone twenty paces they
discovered behind a rock, seated at the foot of an ash tree, a youth
in the dress of a peasant, whose face they were unable at the moment
to see as he was leaning forward, bathing his feet in the brook that
flowed past. They approached so silently that he did not perceive
them, being fully occupied in bathing his feet, which were so fair
that they looked like two pieces of shining crystal brought forth
among the other stones of the brook. The whiteness and beauty of these
feet struck them with surprise, for they did not seem to have been
made to crush clods or to follow the plough and the oxen as their
owner's dress suggested; and so, finding they had not been noticed,
the curate, who was in front, made a sign to the other two to conceal
themselves behind some fragments of rock that lay there; which they
did, observing closely what the youth was about. He had on a loose
double-skirted dark brown jacket bound tight to his body with a white
cloth; he wore besides breeches and gaiters of brown cloth, and on his
head a brown montera; and he had the gaiters turned up as far as the
middle of the leg, which verily seemed to be of pure alabaster. As
soon as he had done bathing his beautiful feet, he wiped them with a
towel he took from under the montera, on taking off which he raised
his face, and those who were watching him had an opportunity of seeing
a beauty so exquisite that Cardenio said to the curate in a whisper:
"As this is not Luscinda, it is no human creature but a divine being."
The youth then took off the montera, and shaking his head from side to
side there broke loose and spread out a mass of hair that the beams of
the sun might have envied; by this they knew that what had seemed a
peasant was a lovely woman, nay the most beautiful the eyes of two of
them had ever beheld, or even Cardenio's if they had not seen and
known Luscinda, for he afterwards declared that only the beauty of
Luscinda could compare with this. The long auburn tresses not only
covered her shoulders, but such was their length and abundance,
concealed her all round beneath their masses, so that except the feet
nothing of her form was visible. She now used her hands as a comb, and
if her feet had seemed like bits of crystal in the water, her hands
looked like pieces of driven snow among her locks; all which increased
not only the admiration of the three beholders, but their anxiety to
learn who she was. With this object they resolved to show themselves,
and at the stir they made in getting upon their feet the fair damsel
raised her head, and parting her hair from before her eyes with both
hands, she looked to see who had made the noise, and the instant she
perceived them she started to her feet, and without waiting to put on
her shoes or gather up her hair, hastily snatched up a bundle as
though of clothes that she had beside her, and, scared and alarmed,
endeavoured to take flight; but before she had gone six paces she fell
to the ground, her delicate feet being unable to bear the roughness of
the stones; seeing which, the three hastened towards her, and the
curate addressing her first said: "Stay, senora, whoever you may be,
for those whom you see here only desire to be of service to you; you
have no need to attempt a flight so heedless, for neither can your
feet bear it, nor we allow it." Taken by surprise and bewildered, she
made no reply to these words. They, however, came towards her, and the
curate taking her hand went on to say: "What your dress would hide,
senora, is made known to us by your hair; a clear proof that it can be
no trifling cause that has disguised your beauty in a garb so unworthy
of it, and sent it into solitudes like these where we have had the
good fortune to find you, if not to relieve your distress, at least to
offer you comfort; for no distress, so long as life lasts, can be so
oppressive or reach such a height as to make the sufferer refuse to
listen to comfort offered with good intention. And so, senora, or
senor, or whatever you prefer to be, dismiss the fears that our
appearance has caused you and make us acquainted with your good or
evil fortunes, for from all of us together, or from each one of us,
you will receive sympathy in your trouble." While the curate was
speaking, the disguised damsel stood as if spell-bound, looking at
them without opening her lips or uttering a word, just like a village
rustic to whom something strange that he has never seen before has
been suddenly shown; but on the curate addressing some further words
to the same effect to her, sighing deeply she broke silence and said:
"Since the solitude of these mountains has been unable to conceal me,
and the escape of my dishevelled tresses will not allow my tongue to
deal in falsehoods, it would be idle for me now to make any further
pretence of what, if you were to believe me, you would believe more
out of courtesy than for any other reason. This being so, I say I
thank you, sirs, for the offer you have made me, which places me under
the obligation of complying with the request you have made of me;
though I fear the account I shall give you of my misfortunes will
excite in you as much concern as compassion, for you will be unable to
suggest anything to remedy them or any consolation to alleviate them.
However, that my honour may not be left a matter of doubt in your
minds, now that you have discovered me to be a woman, and see that I
am young, alone, and in this dress, things that taken together or
separately would be enough to destroy any good name, I feel bound to
tell what I would willingly keep secret if I could." All this she who
was now seen to be a lovely woman delivered without any hesitation,
with so much ease and in so sweet a voice that they were not less
charmed by her intelligence than by her beauty, and as they again
repeated their offers and entreaties to her to fulfil her promise, she
without further pressing, first modestly covering her feet and
gathering up her hair, seated herself on a stone with the three placed
around her, and, after an effort to restrain some tears that came to
her eyes, in a clear and steady voice began her story thus: "In this
Andalusia there is a town from which a duke takes a title which makes
him one of those that are called Grandees of Spain. This nobleman has
two sons, the elder heir to his dignity and apparently to his good
qualities; the younger heir to I know not what, unless it be the
treachery of Vellido and the falsehood of Ganelon. My parents are this
lord's vassals, lowly in origin, but so wealthy that if birth had
conferred as much on them as fortune, they would have had nothing left
to desire, nor should I have had reason to fear trouble like that in
which I find myself now; for it may be that my ill fortune came of
theirs in not having been nobly born. It is true they are not so low
that they have any reason to be ashamed of their condition, but
neither are they so high as to remove from my mind the impression that
my mishap comes of their humble birth. They are, in short, peasants,
plain homely people, without any taint of disreputable blood, and, as
the saying is, old rusty Christians, but so rich that by their wealth
and free-handed way of life they are coming by degrees to be
considered gentlefolk by birth, and even by position; though the
wealth and nobility they thought most of was having me for their
daughter; and as they have no other child to make their heir, and are
affectionate parents, I was one of the most indulged daughters that
ever parents indulged. "I was the mirror in which they beheld
themselves, the staff of their old age, and the object in which, with
submission to Heaven, all their wishes centred, and mine were in
accordance with theirs, for I knew their worth; and as I was mistress
of their hearts, so was I also of their possessions. Through me they
engaged or dismissed their servants; through my hands passed the
accounts and returns of what was sown and reaped; the oil-mills, the
wine-presses, the count of the flocks and herds, the beehives, all in
short that a rich farmer like my father has or can have, I had under
my care, and I acted as steward and mistress with an assiduity on my
part and satisfaction on theirs that I cannot well describe to you.
The leisure hours left to me after I had given the requisite orders to
the head-shepherds, overseers, and other labourers, I passed in such
employments as are not only allowable but necessary for young girls,
those that the needle, embroidery cushion, and spinning wheel usually
afford, and if to refresh my mind I quitted them for a while, I found
recreation in reading some devotional book or playing the harp, for
experience taught me that music soothes the troubled mind and relieves
weariness of spirit. Such was the life I led in my parents' house and
if I have depicted it thus minutely, it is not out of ostentation, or
to let you know that I am rich, but that you may see how, without any
fault of mine, I have fallen from the happy condition I have
described, to the misery I am in at present. The truth is, that while
I was leading this busy life, in a retirement that might compare with
that of a monastery, and unseen as I thought by any except the
servants of the house (for when I went to Mass it was so early in the
morning, and I was so closely attended by my mother and the women of
the household, and so thickly veiled and so shy, that my eyes scarcely
saw more ground than I trod on), in spite of all this, the eyes of
love, or idleness, more properly speaking, that the lynx's cannot
rival, discovered me, with the help of the assiduity of Don Fernando;
for that is the name of the younger son of the duke I told of." The
moment the speaker mentioned the name of Don Fernando, Cardenio
changed colour and broke into a sweat, with such signs of emotion that
the curate and the barber, who observed it, feared that one of the mad
fits which they heard attacked him sometimes was coming upon him; but
Cardenio showed no further agitation and remained quiet, regarding the
peasant girl with fixed attention, for he began to suspect who she
was. She, however, without noticing the excitement of Cardenio,
continuing her story, went on to say: "And they had hardly discovered
me, when, as he owned afterwards, he was smitten with a violent love
for me, as the manner in which it displayed itself plainly showed. But
to shorten the long recital of my woes, I will pass over in silence
all the artifices employed by Don Fernando for declaring his passion
for me. He bribed all the household, he gave and offered gifts and
presents to my parents; every day was like a holiday or a merry-making
in our street; by night no one could sleep for the music; the love
letters that used to come to my hand, no one knew how, were
innumerable, full of tender pleadings and pledges, containing more
promises and oaths than there were letters in them; all which not only
did not soften me, but hardened my heart against him, as if he had
been my mortal enemy, and as if everything he did to make me yield
were done with the opposite intention. Not that the high-bred bearing
of Don Fernando was disagreeable to me, or that I found his
importunities wearisome; for it gave me a certain sort of satisfaction
to find myself so sought and prized by a gentleman of such
distinction, and I was not displeased at seeing my praises in his
letters (for however ugly we women may be, it seems to me it always
pleases us to hear ourselves called beautiful) but that my own sense
of right was opposed to all this, as well as the repeated advice of my
parents, who now very plainly perceived Don Fernando's purpose, for he
cared very little if all the world knew it. They told me they trusted
and confided their honour and good name to my virtue and rectitude
alone, and bade me consider the disparity between Don Fernando and
myself, from which I might conclude that his intentions, whatever he
might say to the contrary, had for their aim his own pleasure rather
than my advantage; and if I were at all desirous of opposing an
obstacle to his unreasonable suit, they were ready, they said, to
marry me at once to anyone I preferred, either among the leading
people of our own town, or of any of those in the neighbourhood; for
with their wealth and my good name, a match might be looked for in any
quarter. This offer, and their sound advice strengthened my
resolution, and I never gave Don Fernando a word in reply that could
hold out to him any hope of success, however remote. "All this caution
of mine, which he must have taken for coyness, had apparently the
effect of increasing his wanton appetite--for that is the name I give
to his passion for me; had it been what he declared it to be, you
would not know of it now, because there would have been no occasion to
tell you of it. At length he learned that my parents were
contemplating marriage for me in order to put an end to his hopes of
obtaining possession of me, or at least to secure additional
protectors to watch over me, and this intelligence or suspicion made
him act as you shall hear. One night, as I was in my chamber with no
other companion than a damsel who waited on me, with the doors
carefully locked lest my honour should be imperilled through any
carelessness, I know not nor can conceive how it happened, but, with
all this seclusion and these precautions, and in the solitude and
silence of my retirement, I found him standing before me, a vision
that so astounded me that it deprived my eyes of sight, and my tongue
of speech. I had no power to utter a cry, nor, I think, did he give me
time to utter one, as he immediately approached me, and taking me in
his arms (for, overwhelmed as I was, I was powerless, I say, to help
myself), he began to make such professions to me that I know not how
falsehood could have had the power of dressing them up to seem so like
truth; and the traitor contrived that his tears should vouch for his
words, and his sighs for his sincerity. "I, a poor young creature
alone, ill versed among my people in cases such as this, began, I know
not how, to think all these lying protestations true, though without
being moved by his sighs and tears to anything more than pure
compassion; and so, as the first feeling of bewilderment passed away,
and I began in some degree to recover myself, I said to him with more
courage than I thought I could have possessed, 'If, as I am now in
your arms, senor, I were in the claws of a fierce lion, and my
deliverance could be procured by doing or saying anything to the
prejudice of my honour, it would no more be in my power to do it or
say it, than it would be possible that what was should not have been;
so then, if you hold my body clasped in your arms, I hold my soul
secured by virtuous intentions, very different from yours, as you will
see if you attempt to carry them into effect by force. I am your
vassal, but I am not your slave; your nobility neither has nor should
have any right to dishonour or degrade my humble birth; and low-born
peasant as I am, I have my self-respect as much as you, a lord and
gentleman: with me your violence will be to no purpose, your wealth
will have no weight, your words will have no power to deceive me, nor
your sighs or tears to soften me: were I to see any of the things I
speak of in him whom my parents gave me as a husband, his will should
be mine, and mine should be bounded by his; and my honour being
preserved even though my inclinations were not would willingly yield
him what you, senor, would now obtain by force; and this I say lest
you should suppose that any but my lawful husband shall ever win
anything of me.' 'If that,' said this disloyal gentleman, 'be the only
scruple you feel, fairest Dorothea' (for that is the name of this
unhappy being), 'see here I give you my hand to be yours, and let
Heaven, from which nothing is hid, and this image of Our Lady you have
here, be witnesses of this pledge.'" When Cardenio heard her say she
was called Dorothea, he showed fresh agitation and felt convinced of
the truth of his former suspicion, but he was unwilling to interrupt
the story, and wished to hear the end of what he already all but knew,
so he merely said: "What! is Dorothea your name, senora? I have heard
of another of the same name who can perhaps match your misfortunes.
But proceed; by-and-by I may tell you something that will astonish you
as much as it will excite your compassion." Dorothea was struck by
Cardenio's words as well as by his strange and miserable attire, and
begged him if he knew anything concerning her to tell it to her at
once, for if fortune had left her any blessing it was courage to bear
whatever calamity might fall upon her, as she felt sure that none
could reach her capable of increasing in any degree what she endured
already. "I would not let the occasion pass, senora," replied
Cardenio, "of telling you what I think, if what I suspect were the
truth, but so far there has been no opportunity, nor is it of any
importance to you to know it." "Be it as it may," replied Dorothea,
"what happened in my story was that Don Fernando, taking an image that
stood in the chamber, placed it as a witness of our betrothal, and
with the most binding words and extravagant oaths gave me his promise
to become my husband; though before he had made an end of pledging
himself I bade him consider well what he was doing, and think of the
anger his father would feel at seeing him married to a peasant girl
and one of his vassals; I told him not to let my beauty, such as it
was, blind him, for that was not enough to furnish an excuse for his
transgression; and if in the love he bore me he wished to do me any
kindness, it would be to leave my lot to follow its course at the
level my condition required; for marriages so unequal never brought
happiness, nor did they continue long to afford the enjoyment they
began with. "All this that I have now repeated I said to him, and much
more which I cannot recollect; but it had no effect in inducing him to
forego his purpose; he who has no intention of paying does not trouble
himself about difficulties when he is striking the bargain. At the
same time I argued the matter briefly in my own mind, saying to
myself, 'I shall not be the first who has risen through marriage from
a lowly to a lofty station, nor will Don Fernando be the first whom
beauty or, as is more likely, a blind attachment, has led to mate
himself below his rank. Then, since I am introducing no new usage or
practice, I may as well avail myself of the honour that chance offers
me, for even though his inclination for me should not outlast the
attainment of his wishes, I shall be, after all, his wife before God.
And if I strive to repel him by scorn, I can see that, fair means
failing, he is in a mood to use force, and I shall be left dishonoured
and without any means of proving my innocence to those who cannot know
how innocently I have come to be in this position; for what arguments
would persuade my parents that this gentleman entered my chamber
without my consent?' "All these questions and answers passed through
my mind in a moment; but the oaths of Don Fernando, the witnesses he
appealed to, the tears he shed, and lastly the charms of his person
and his high-bred grace, which, accompanied by such signs of genuine
love, might well have conquered a heart even more free and coy than
mine--these were the things that more than all began to influence me
and lead me unawares to my ruin. I called my waiting-maid to me, that
there might be a witness on earth besides those in Heaven, and again
Don Fernando renewed and repeated his oaths, invoked as witnesses
fresh saints in addition to the former ones, called down upon himself
a thousand curses hereafter should he fail to keep his promise, shed
more tears, redoubled his sighs and pressed me closer in his arms,
from which he had never allowed me to escape; and so I was left by my
maid, and ceased to be one, and he became a traitor and a perjured
man. "The day which followed the night of my misfortune did not come
so quickly, I imagine, as Don Fernando wished, for when desire has
attained its object, the greatest pleasure is to fly from the scene of
pleasure. I say so because Don Fernando made all haste to leave me,
and by the adroitness of my maid, who was indeed the one who had
admitted him, gained the street before daybreak; but on taking leave
of me he told me, though not with as much earnestness and fervour as
when he came, that I might rest assured of his faith and of the
sanctity and sincerity of his oaths; and to confirm his words he drew
a rich ring off his finger and placed it upon mine. He then took his
departure and I was left, I know not whether sorrowful or happy; all I
can say is, I was left agitated and troubled in mind and almost
bewildered by what had taken place, and I had not the spirit, or else
it did not occur to me, to chide my maid for the treachery she had
been guilty of in concealing Don Fernando in my chamber; for as yet I
was unable to make up my mind whether what had befallen me was for
good or evil. I told Don Fernando at parting, that as I was now his,
he might see me on other nights in the same way, until it should be
his pleasure to let the matter become known; but, except the following
night, he came no more, nor for more than a month could I catch a
glimpse of him in the street or in church, while I wearied myself with
watching for one; although I knew he was in the town, and almost every
day went out hunting, a pastime he was very fond of. I remember well
how sad and dreary those days and hours were to me; I remember well
how I began to doubt as they went by, and even to lose confidence in
the faith of Don Fernando; and I remember, too, how my maid heard
those words in reproof of her audacity that she had not heard before,
and how I was forced to put a constraint on my tears and on the
expression of my countenance, not to give my parents cause to ask me
why I was so melancholy, and drive me to invent falsehoods in reply.
But all this was suddenly brought to an end, for the time came when
all such considerations were disregarded, and there was no further
question of honour, when my patience gave way and the secret of my
heart became known abroad. The reason was, that a few days later it
was reported in the town that Don Fernando had been married in a
neighbouring city to a maiden of rare beauty, the daughter of parents
of distinguished position, though not so rich that her portion would
entitle her to look for so brilliant a match; it was said, too, that
her name was Luscinda, and that at the betrothal some strange things
had happened." Cardenio heard the name of Luscinda, but he only
shrugged his shoulders, bit his lips, bent his brows, and before long
two streams of tears escaped from his eyes. Dorothea, however, did not
interrupt her story, but went on in these words: "This sad
intelligence reached my ears, and, instead of being struck with a
chill, with such wrath and fury did my heart burn that I scarcely
restrained myself from rushing out into the streets, crying aloud and
proclaiming openly the perfidy and treachery of which I was the
victim; but this transport of rage was for the time checked by a
resolution I formed, to be carried out the same night, and that was to
assume this dress, which I got from a servant of my father's, one of
the zagals, as they are called in farmhouses, to whom I confided the
whole of my misfortune, and whom I entreated to accompany me to the
city where I heard my enemy was. He, though he remonstrated with me
for my boldness, and condemned my resolution, when he saw me bent upon
my purpose, offered to bear me company, as he said, to the end of the
world. I at once packed up in a linen pillow-case a woman's dress, and
some jewels and money to provide for emergencies, and in the silence
of the night, without letting my treacherous maid know, I sallied
forth from the house, accompanied by my servant and abundant
anxieties, and on foot set out for the city, but borne as it were on
wings by my eagerness to reach it, if not to prevent what I presumed
to be already done, at least to call upon Don Fernando to tell me with
what conscience he had done it. I reached my destination in two days
and a half, and on entering the city inquired for the house of
Luscinda's parents. The first person I asked gave me more in reply
than I sought to know; he showed me the house, and told me all that
had occurred at the betrothal of the daughter of the family, an affair
of such notoriety in the city that it was the talk of every knot of
idlers in the street. He said that on the night of Don Fernando's
betrothal with Luscinda, as soon as she had consented to be his bride
by saying 'Yes,' she was taken with a sudden fainting fit, and that on
the bridegroom approaching to unlace the bosom of her dress to give
her air, he found a paper in her own handwriting, in which she said
and declared that she could not be Don Fernando's bride, because she
was already Cardenio's, who, according to the man's account, was a
gentleman of distinction of the same city; and that if she had
accepted Don Fernando, it was only in obedience to her parents. In
short, he said, the words of the paper made it clear she meant to kill
herself on the completion of the betrothal, and gave her reasons for
putting an end to herself all which was confirmed, it was said, by a
dagger they found somewhere in her clothes. On seeing this, Don
Fernando, persuaded that Luscinda had befooled, slighted, and trifled
with him, assailed her before she had recovered from her swoon, and
tried to stab her with the dagger that had been found, and would have
succeeded had not her parents and those who were present prevented
him. It was said, moreover, that Don Fernando went away at once, and
that Luscinda did not recover from her prostration until the next day,
when she told her parents how she was really the bride of that
Cardenio I have mentioned. I learned besides that Cardenio, according
to report, had been present at the betrothal; and that upon seeing her
betrothed contrary to his expectation, he had quitted the city in
despair, leaving behind him a letter declaring the wrong Luscinda had
done him, and his intention of going where no one should ever see him
again. All this was a matter of notoriety in the city, and everyone
spoke of it; especially when it became known that Luscinda was missing
from her father's house and from the city, for she was not to be found
anywhere, to the distraction of her parents, who knew not what steps
to take to recover her. What I learned revived my hopes, and I was
better pleased not to have found Don Fernando than to find him
married, for it seemed to me that the door was not yet entirely shut
upon relief in my case, and I thought that perhaps Heaven had put this
impediment in the way of the second marriage, to lead him to recognise
his obligations under the former one, and reflect that as a Christian
he was bound to consider his soul above all human objects. All this
passed through my mind, and I strove to comfort myself without
comfort, indulging in faint and distant hopes of cherishing that life
that I now abhor. "But while I was in the city, uncertain what to do,
as I could not find Don Fernando, I heard notice given by the public
crier offering a great reward to anyone who should find me, and giving
the particulars of my age and of the very dress I wore; and I heard it
said that the lad who came with me had taken me away from my father's
house; a thing that cut me to the heart, showing how low my good name
had fallen, since it was not enough that I should lose it by my
flight, but they must add with whom I had fled, and that one so much
beneath me and so unworthy of my consideration. The instant I heard
the notice I quitted the city with my servant, who now began to show
signs of wavering in his fidelity to me, and the same night, for fear
of discovery, we entered the most thickly wooded part of these
mountains. But, as is commonly said, one evil calls up another and the
end of one misfortune is apt to be the beginning of one still greater,
and so it proved in my case; for my worthy servant, until then so
faithful and trusty when he found me in this lonely spot, moved more
by his own villainy than by my beauty, sought to take advantage of the
opportunity which these solitudes seemed to present him, and with
little shame and less fear of God and respect for me, began to make
overtures to me; and finding that I replied to the effrontery of his
proposals with justly severe language, he laid aside the entreaties
which he had employed at first, and began to use violence. "But just
Heaven, that seldom fails to watch over and aid good intentions, so
aided mine that with my slight strength and with little exertion I
pushed him over a precipice, where I left him, whether dead or alive I
know not; and then, with greater speed than seemed possible in my
terror and fatigue, I made my way into the mountains, without any
other thought or purpose save that of hiding myself among them, and
escaping my father and those despatched in search of me by his orders.
It is now I know not how many months since with this object I came
here, where I met a herdsman who engaged me as his servant at a place
in the heart of this Sierra, and all this time I have been serving him
as herd, striving to keep always afield to hide these locks which have
now unexpectedly betrayed me. But all my care and pains were
unavailing, for my master made the discovery that I was not a man, and
harboured the same base designs as my servant; and as fortune does not
always supply a remedy in cases of difficulty, and I had no precipice
or ravine at hand down which to fling the master and cure his passion,
as I had in the servant's case, I thought it a lesser evil to leave
him and again conceal myself among these crags, than make trial of my
strength and argument with him. So, as I say, once more I went into
hiding to seek for some place where I might with sighs and tears
implore Heaven to have pity on my misery, and grant me help and
strength to escape from it, or let me die among the solitudes, leaving
no trace of an unhappy being who, by no fault of hers, has furnished
matter for talk and scandal at home and abroad." CHAPTER XXIX. WHICH
TREATS OF THE DROLL DEVICE AND METHOD ADOPTED TO EXTRICATE OUR
LOVE-STRICKEN KNIGHT FROM THE SEVERE PENANCE HE HAD IMPOSED UPON
HIMSELF "Such, sirs, is the true story of my sad adventures; judge for
yourselves now whether the sighs and lamentations you heard, and the
tears that flowed from my eyes, had not sufficient cause even if I had
indulged in them more freely; and if you consider the nature of my
misfortune you will see that consolation is idle, as there is no
possible remedy for it. All I ask of you is, what you may easily and
reasonably do, to show me where I may pass my life unharassed by the
fear and dread of discovery by those who are in search of me; for
though the great love my parents bear me makes me feel sure of being
kindly received by them, so great is my feeling of shame at the mere
thought that I cannot present myself before them as they expect, that
I had rather banish myself from their sight for ever than look them in
the face with the reflection that they beheld mine stripped of that
purity they had a right to expect in me." With these words she became
silent, and the colour that overspread her face showed plainly the
pain and shame she was suffering at heart. In theirs the listeners
felt as much pity as wonder at her misfortunes; but as the curate was
just about to offer her some consolation and advice Cardenio
forestalled him, saying, "So then, senora, you are the fair Dorothea,
the only daughter of the rich Clenardo?" Dorothea was astonished at
hearing her father's name, and at the miserable appearance of him who
mentioned it, for it has been already said how wretchedly clad
Cardenio was; so she said to him: "And who may you be, brother, who
seem to know my father's name so well? For so far, if I remember
rightly, I have not mentioned it in the whole story of my
misfortunes." "I am that unhappy being, senora," replied Cardenio,
"whom, as you have said, Luscinda declared to be her husband; I am the
unfortunate Cardenio, whom the wrong-doing of him who has brought you
to your present condition has reduced to the state you see me in,
bare, ragged, bereft of all human comfort, and what is worse, of
reason, for I only possess it when Heaven is pleased for some short
space to restore it to me. I, Dorothea, am he who witnessed the wrong
done by Don Fernando, and waited to hear the 'Yes' uttered by which
Luscinda owned herself his betrothed: I am he who had not courage
enough to see how her fainting fit ended, or what came of the paper
that was found in her bosom, because my heart had not the fortitude to
endure so many strokes of ill-fortune at once; and so losing patience
I quitted the house, and leaving a letter with my host, which I
entreated him to place in Luscinda's hands, I betook myself to these
solitudes, resolved to end here the life I hated as if it were my
mortal enemy. But fate would not rid me of it, contenting itself with
robbing me of my reason, perhaps to preserve me for the good fortune I
have had in meeting you; for if that which you have just told us be
true, as I believe it to be, it may be that Heaven has yet in store
for both of us a happier termination to our misfortunes than we look
for; because seeing that Luscinda cannot marry Don Fernando, being
mine, as she has herself so openly declared, and that Don Fernando
cannot marry her as he is yours, we may reasonably hope that Heaven
will restore to us what is ours, as it is still in existence and not
yet alienated or destroyed. And as we have this consolation springing
from no very visionary hope or wild fancy, I entreat you, senora, to
form new resolutions in your better mind, as I mean to do in mine,
preparing yourself to look forward to happier fortunes; for I swear to
you by the faith of a gentleman and a Christian not to desert you
until I see you in possession of Don Fernando, and if I cannot by
words induce him to recognise his obligation to you, in that case to
avail myself of the right which my rank as a gentleman gives me, and
with just cause challenge him on account of the injury he has done
you, not regarding my own wrongs, which I shall leave to Heaven to
avenge, while I on earth devote myself to yours." Cardenio's words
completed the astonishment of Dorothea, and not knowing how to return
thanks for such an offer, she attempted to kiss his feet; but Cardenio
would not permit it, and the licentiate replied for both, commended
the sound reasoning of Cardenio, and lastly, begged, advised, and
urged them to come with him to his village, where they might furnish
themselves with what they needed, and take measures to discover Don
Fernando, or restore Dorothea to her parents, or do what seemed to
them most advisable. Cardenio and Dorothea thanked him, and accepted
the kind offer he made them; and the barber, who had been listening to
all attentively and in silence, on his part some kindly words also,
and with no less good-will than the curate offered his services in any
way that might be of use to them. He also explained to them in a few
words the object that had brought them there, and the strange nature
of Don Quixote's madness, and how they were waiting for his squire,
who had gone in search of him. Like the recollection of a dream, the
quarrel he had had with Don Quixote came back to Cardenio's memory,
and he described it to the others; but he was unable to say what the
dispute was about. At this moment they heard a shout, and recognised
it as coming from Sancho Panza, who, not finding them where he had
left them, was calling aloud to them. They went to meet him, and in
answer to their inquiries about Don Quixote, he told them how he had
found him stripped to his shirt, lank, yellow, half dead with hunger,
and sighing for his lady Dulcinea; and although he had told him that
she commanded him to quit that place and come to El Toboso, where she
was expecting him, he had answered that he was determined not to
appear in the presence of her beauty until he had done deeds to make
him worthy of her favour; and if this went on, Sancho said, he ran the
risk of not becoming an emperor as in duty bound, or even an
archbishop, which was the least he could be; for which reason they
ought to consider what was to be done to get him away from there. The
licentiate in reply told him not to be uneasy, for they would fetch
him away in spite of himself. He then told Cardenio and Dorothea what
they had proposed to do to cure Don Quixote, or at any rate take him
home; upon which Dorothea said that she could play the distressed
damsel better than the barber; especially as she had there the dress
in which to do it to the life, and that they might trust to her acting
the part in every particular requisite for carrying out their scheme,
for she had read a great many books of chivalry, and knew exactly the
style in which afflicted damsels begged boons of knights-errant. "In
that case," said the curate, "there is nothing more required than to
set about it at once, for beyond a doubt fortune is declaring itself
in our favour, since it has so unexpectedly begun to open a door for
your relief, and smoothed the way for us to our object." Dorothea then
took out of her pillow-case a complete petticoat of some rich stuff,
and a green mantle of some other fine material, and a necklace and
other ornaments out of a little box, and with these in an instant she
so arrayed herself that she looked like a great and rich lady. All
this, and more, she said, she had taken from home in case of need, but
that until then she had had no occasion to make use of it. They were
all highly delighted with her grace, air, and beauty, and declared Don
Fernando to be a man of very little taste when he rejected such
charms. But the one who admired her most was Sancho Panza, for it
seemed to him (what indeed was true) that in all the days of his life
he had never seen such a lovely creature; and he asked the curate with
great eagerness who this beautiful lady was, and what she wanted in
these out-of-the-way quarters. "This fair lady, brother Sancho,"
replied the curate, "is no less a personage than the heiress in the
direct male line of the great kingdom of Micomicon, who has come in
search of your master to beg a boon of him, which is that he redress a
wrong or injury that a wicked giant has done her; and from the fame as
a good knight which your master has acquired far and wide, this
princess has come from Guinea to seek him." "A lucky seeking and a
lucky finding!" said Sancho Panza at this; "especially if my master
has the good fortune to redress that injury, and right that wrong, and
kill that son of a bitch of a giant your worship speaks of; as kill
him he will if he meets him, unless, indeed, he happens to be a
phantom; for my master has no power at all against phantoms. But one
thing among others I would beg of you, senor licentiate, which is,
that, to prevent my master taking a fancy to be an archbishop, for
that is what I'm afraid of, your worship would recommend him to marry
this princess at once; for in this way he will be disabled from taking
archbishop's orders, and will easily come into his empire, and I to
the end of my desires; I have been thinking over the matter carefully,
and by what I can make out I find it will not do for me that my master
should become an archbishop, because I am no good for the Church, as I
am married; and for me now, having as I have a wife and children, to
set about obtaining dispensations to enable me to hold a place of
profit under the Church, would be endless work; so that, senor, it all
turns on my master marrying this lady at once--for as yet I do not
know her grace, and so I cannot call her by her name." "She is called
the Princess Micomicona," said the curate; "for as her kingdom is
Micomicon, it is clear that must be her name." "There's no doubt of
that," replied Sancho, "for I have known many to take their name and
title from the place where they were born and call themselves Pedro of
Alcala, Juan of Ubeda, and Diego of Valladolid; and it may be that
over there in Guinea queens have the same way of taking the names of
their kingdoms." "So it may," said the curate; "and as for your
master's marrying, I will do all in my power towards it:" with which
Sancho was as much pleased as the curate was amazed at his simplicity
and at seeing what a hold the absurdities of his master had taken of
his fancy, for he had evidently persuaded himself that he was going to
be an emperor. By this time Dorothea had seated herself upon the
curate's mule, and the barber had fitted the ox-tail beard to his
face, and they now told Sancho to conduct them to where Don Quixote
was, warning him not to say that he knew either the licentiate or the
barber, as his master's becoming an emperor entirely depended on his
not recognising them; neither the curate nor Cardenio, however,
thought fit to go with them; Cardenio lest he should remind Don
Quixote of the quarrel he had with him, and the curate as there was no
necessity for his presence just yet, so they allowed the others to go
on before them, while they themselves followed slowly on foot. The
curate did not forget to instruct Dorothea how to act, but she said
they might make their minds easy, as everything would be done exactly
as the books of chivalry required and described. They had gone about
three-quarters of a league when they discovered Don Quixote in a
wilderness of rocks, by this time clothed, but without his armour; and
as soon as Dorothea saw him and was told by Sancho that that was Don
Quixote, she whipped her palfrey, the well-bearded barber following
her, and on coming up to him her squire sprang from his mule and came
forward to receive her in his arms, and she dismounting with great
ease of manner advanced to kneel before the feet of Don Quixote; and
though he strove to raise her up, she without rising addressed him in
this fashion: "From this spot I will not rise, valiant and doughty
knight, until your goodness and courtesy grant me a boon, which will
redound to the honour and renown of your person and render a service
to the most disconsolate and afflicted damsel the sun has seen; and if
the might of your strong arm corresponds to the repute of your
immortal fame, you are bound to aid the helpless being who, led by the
savour of your renowned name, hath come from far distant lands to seek
your aid in her misfortunes." "I will not answer a word, beauteous
lady," replied Don Quixote, "nor will I listen to anything further
concerning you, until you rise from the earth." "I will not rise,
senor," answered the afflicted damsel, "unless of your courtesy the
boon I ask is first granted me." "I grant and accord it," said Don
Quixote, "provided without detriment or prejudice to my king, my
country, or her who holds the key of my heart and freedom, it may be
complied with." "It will not be to the detriment or prejudice of any
of them, my worthy lord," said the afflicted damsel; and here Sancho
Panza drew close to his master's ear and said to him very softly,
"Your worship may very safely grant the boon she asks; it's nothing at
all; only to kill a big giant; and she who asks it is the exalted
Princess Micomicona, queen of the great kingdom of Micomicon of
Ethiopia." "Let her be who she may," replied Don Quixote, "I will do
what is my bounden duty, and what my conscience bids me, in conformity
with what I have professed;" and turning to the damsel he said, "Let
your great beauty rise, for I grant the boon which you would ask of
me." "Then what I ask," said the damsel, "is that your magnanimous
person accompany me at once whither I will conduct you, and that you
promise not to engage in any other adventure or quest until you have
avenged me of a traitor who against all human and divine law, has
usurped my kingdom." "I repeat that I grant it," replied Don Quixote;
"and so, lady, you may from this day forth lay aside the melancholy
that distresses you, and let your failing hopes gather new life and
strength, for with the help of God and of my arm you will soon see
yourself restored to your kingdom, and seated upon the throne of your
ancient and mighty realm, notwithstanding and despite of the felons
who would gainsay it; and now hands to the work, for in delay there is
apt to be danger." The distressed damsel strove with much pertinacity
to kiss his hands; but Don Quixote, who was in all things a polished
and courteous knight, would by no means allow it, but made her rise
and embraced her with great courtesy and politeness, and ordered
Sancho to look to Rocinante's girths, and to arm him without a
moment's delay. Sancho took down the armour, which was hung up on a
tree like a trophy, and having seen to the girths armed his master in
a trice, who as soon as he found himself in his armour exclaimed: "Let
us be gone in the name of God to bring aid to this great lady." The
barber was all this time on his knees at great pains to hide his
laughter and not let his beard fall, for had it fallen maybe their
fine scheme would have come to nothing; but now seeing the boon
granted, and the promptitude with which Don Quixote prepared to set
out in compliance with it, he rose and took his lady's hand, and
between them they placed her upon the mule. Don Quixote then mounted
Rocinante, and the barber settled himself on his beast, Sancho being
left to go on foot, which made him feel anew the loss of his Dapple,
finding the want of him now. But he bore all with cheerfulness, being
persuaded that his master had now fairly started and was just on the
point of becoming an emperor; for he felt no doubt at all that he
would marry this princess, and be king of Micomicon at least. The only
thing that troubled him was the reflection that this kingdom was in
the land of the blacks, and that the people they would give him for
vassals would be all black; but for this he soon found a remedy in his
fancy, and said he to himself, "What is it to me if my vassals are
blacks? What more have I to do than make a cargo of them and carry
them to Spain, where I can sell them and get ready money for them, and
with it buy some title or some office in which to live at ease all the
days of my life? Not unless you go to sleep and haven't the wit or
skill to turn things to account and sell three, six, or ten thousand
vassals while you would be talking about it! By God I will stir them
up, big and little, or as best I can, and let them be ever so black
I'll turn them into white or yellow. Come, come, what a fool I am!"
And so he jogged on, so occupied with his thoughts and easy in his
mind that he forgot all about the hardship of travelling on foot.
Cardenio and the curate were watching all this from among some bushes,
not knowing how to join company with the others; but the curate, who
was very fertile in devices, soon hit upon a way of effecting their
purpose, and with a pair of scissors he had in a case he quickly cut
off Cardenio's beard, and putting on him a grey jerkin of his own he
gave him a black cloak, leaving himself in his breeches and doublet,
while Cardenio's appearance was so different from what it had been
that he would not have known himself had he seen himself in a mirror.
Having effected this, although the others had gone on ahead while they
were disguising themselves, they easily came out on the high road
before them, for the brambles and awkward places they encountered did
not allow those on horseback to go as fast as those on foot. They then
posted themselves on the level ground at the outlet of the Sierra, and
as soon as Don Quixote and his companions emerged from it the curate
began to examine him very deliberately, as though he were striving to
recognise him, and after having stared at him for some time he
hastened towards him with open arms exclaiming, "A happy meeting with
the mirror of chivalry, my worthy compatriot Don Quixote of La Mancha,
the flower and cream of high breeding, the protection and relief of
the distressed, the quintessence of knights-errant!" And so saying he
clasped in his arms the knee of Don Quixote's left leg. He, astonished
at the stranger's words and behaviour, looked at him attentively, and
at length recognised him, very much surprised to see him there, and
made great efforts to dismount. This, however, the curate would not
allow, on which Don Quixote said, "Permit me, senor licentiate, for it
is not fitting that I should be on horseback and so reverend a person
as your worship on foot." "On no account will I allow it," said the
curate; "your mightiness must remain on horseback, for it is on
horseback you achieve the greatest deeds and adventures that have been
beheld in our age; as for me, an unworthy priest, it will serve me
well enough to mount on the haunches of one of the mules of these
gentlefolk who accompany your worship, if they have no objection, and
I will fancy I am mounted on the steed Pegasus, or on the zebra or
charger that bore the famous Moor, Muzaraque, who to this day lies
enchanted in the great hill of Zulema, a little distance from the
great Complutum." "Nor even that will I consent to, senor licentiate,"
answered Don Quixote, "and I know it will be the good pleasure of my
lady the princess, out of love for me, to order her squire to give up
the saddle of his mule to your worship, and he can sit behind if the
beast will bear it." "It will, I am sure," said the princess, "and I
am sure, too, that I need not order my squire, for he is too courteous
and considerate to allow a Churchman to go on foot when he might be
mounted." "That he is," said the barber, and at once alighting, he
offered his saddle to the curate, who accepted it without much
entreaty; but unfortunately as the barber was mounting behind, the
mule, being as it happened a hired one, which is the same thing as
saying ill-conditioned, lifted its hind hoofs and let fly a couple of
kicks in the air, which would have made Master Nicholas wish his
expedition in quest of Don Quixote at the devil had they caught him on
the breast or head. As it was, they so took him by surprise that he
came to the ground, giving so little heed to his beard that it fell
off, and all he could do when he found himself without it was to cover
his face hastily with both his hands and moan that his teeth were
knocked out. Don Quixote when he saw all that bundle of beard
detached, without jaws or blood, from the face of the fallen squire,
exclaimed: "By the living God, but this is a great miracle! it has
knocked off and plucked away the beard from his face as if it had been
shaved off designedly." The curate, seeing the danger of discovery
that threatened his scheme, at once pounced upon the beard and
hastened with it to where Master Nicholas lay, still uttering moans,
and drawing his head to his breast had it on in an instant, muttering
over him some words which he said were a certain special charm for
sticking on beards, as they would see; and as soon as he had it fixed
he left him, and the squire appeared well bearded and whole as before,
whereat Don Quixote was beyond measure astonished, and begged the
curate to teach him that charm when he had an opportunity, as he was
persuaded its virtue must extend beyond the sticking on of beards, for
it was clear that where the beard had been stripped off the flesh must
have remained torn and lacerated, and when it could heal all that it
must be good for more than beards. "And so it is," said the curate,
and he promised to teach it to him on the first opportunity. They then
agreed that for the present the curate should mount, and that the
three should ride by turns until they reached the inn, which might be
about six leagues from where they were. Three then being mounted, that
is to say, Don Quixote, the princess, and the curate, and three on
foot, Cardenio, the barber, and Sancho Panza, Don Quixote said to the
damsel: "Let your highness, lady, lead on whithersoever is most
pleasing to you;" but before she could answer the licentiate said:
"Towards what kingdom would your ladyship direct our course? Is it
perchance towards that of Micomicon? It must be, or else I know little
about kingdoms." She, being ready on all points, understood that she
was to answer "Yes," so she said "Yes, senor, my way lies towards that
kingdom." "In that case," said the curate, "we must pass right through
my village, and there your worship will take the road to Cartagena,
where you will be able to embark, fortune favouring; and if the wind
be fair and the sea smooth and tranquil, in somewhat less than nine
years you may come in sight of the great lake Meona, I mean Meotides,
which is little more than a hundred days' journey this side of your
highness's kingdom." "Your worship is mistaken, senor," said she; "for
it is not two years since I set out from it, and though I never had
good weather, nevertheless I am here to behold what I so longed for,
and that is my lord Don Quixote of La Mancha, whose fame came to my
ears as soon as I set foot in Spain and impelled me to go in search of
him, to commend myself to his courtesy, and entrust the justice of my
cause to the might of his invincible arm." "Enough; no more praise,"
said Don Quixote at this, "for I hate all flattery; and though this
may not be so, still language of the kind is offensive to my chaste
ears. I will only say, senora, that whether it has might or not, that
which it may or may not have shall be devoted to your service even to
death; and now, leaving this to its proper season, I would ask the
senor licentiate to tell me what it is that has brought him into these
parts, alone, unattended, and so lightly clad that I am filled with
amazement." "I will answer that briefly," replied the curate; "you
must know then, Senor Don Quixote, that Master Nicholas, our friend
and barber, and I were going to Seville to receive some money that a
relative of mine who went to the Indies many years ago had sent me,
and not such a small sum but that it was over sixty thousand pieces of
eight, full weight, which is something; and passing by this place
yesterday we were attacked by four footpads, who stripped us even to
our beards, and them they stripped off so that the barber found it
necessary to put on a false one, and even this young man
here"-pointing to Cardenio--"they completely transformed. But the best
of it is, the story goes in the neighbourhood that those who attacked
us belong to a number of galley slaves who, they say, were set free
almost on the very same spot by a man of such valour that, in spite of
the commissary and of the guards, he released the whole of them; and
beyond all doubt he must have been out of his senses, or he must be as
great a scoundrel as they, or some man without heart or conscience to
let the wolf loose among the sheep, the fox among the hens, the fly
among the honey. He has defrauded justice, and opposed his king and
lawful master, for he opposed his just commands; he has, I say, robbed
the galleys of their feet, stirred up the Holy Brotherhood which for
many years past has been quiet, and, lastly, has done a deed by which
his soul may be lost without any gain to his body." Sancho had told
the curate and the barber of the adventure of the galley slaves,
which, so much to his glory, his master had achieved, and hence the
curate in alluding to it made the most of it to see what would be said
or done by Don Quixote; who changed colour at every word, not daring
to say that it was he who had been the liberator of those worthy
people. "These, then," said the curate, "were they who robbed us; and
God in his mercy pardon him who would not let them go to the
punishment they deserved." CHAPTER XXX. WHICH TREATS OF ADDRESS
DISPLAYED BY THE FAIR DOROTHEA, WITH OTHER MATTERS PLEASANT AND
AMUSING The curate had hardly ceased speaking, when Sancho said, "In
faith, then, senor licentiate, he who did that deed was my master; and
it was not for want of my telling him beforehand and warning him to
mind what he was about, and that it was a sin to set them at liberty,
as they were all on the march there because they were special
scoundrels." "Blockhead!" said Don Quixote at this, "it is no business
or concern of knights-errant to inquire whether any persons in
affliction, in chains, or oppressed that they may meet on the high
roads go that way and suffer as they do because of their faults or
because of their misfortunes. It only concerns them to aid them as
persons in need of help, having regard to their sufferings and not to
their rascalities. I encountered a chaplet or string of miserable and
unfortunate people, and did for them what my sense of duty demands of
me, and as for the rest be that as it may; and whoever takes objection
to it, saving the sacred dignity of the senor licentiate and his
honoured person, I say he knows little about chivalry and lies like a
whoreson villain, and this I will give him to know to the fullest
extent with my sword;" and so saying he settled himself in his
stirrups and pressed down his morion; for the barber's basin, which
according to him was Mambrino's helmet, he carried hanging at the
saddle-bow until he could repair the damage done to it by the galley
slaves. Dorothea, who was shrewd and sprightly, and by this time
thoroughly understood Don Quixote's crazy turn, and that all except
Sancho Panza were making game of him, not to be behind the rest said
to him, on observing his irritation, "Sir Knight, remember the boon
you have promised me, and that in accordance with it you must not
engage in any other adventure, be it ever so pressing; calm yourself,
for if the licentiate had known that the galley slaves had been set
free by that unconquered arm he would have stopped his mouth thrice
over, or even bitten his tongue three times before he would have said
a word that tended towards disrespect of your worship." "That I swear
heartily," said the curate, "and I would have even plucked off a
moustache." "I will hold my peace, senora," said Don Quixote, "and I
will curb the natural anger that had arisen in my breast, and will
proceed in peace and quietness until I have fulfilled my promise; but
in return for this consideration I entreat you to tell me, if you have
no objection to do so, what is the nature of your trouble, and how
many, who, and what are the persons of whom I am to require due
satisfaction, and on whom I am to take vengeance on your behalf?"
"That I will do with all my heart," replied Dorothea, "if it will not
be wearisome to you to hear of miseries and misfortunes." "It will not
be wearisome, senora," said Don Quixote; to which Dorothea replied,
"Well, if that be so, give me your attention." As soon as she said
this, Cardenio and the barber drew close to her side, eager to hear
what sort of story the quick-witted Dorothea would invent for herself;
and Sancho did the same, for he was as much taken in by her as his
master; and she having settled herself comfortably in the saddle, and
with the help of coughing and other preliminaries taken time to think,
began with great sprightliness of manner in this fashion. "First of
all, I would have you know, sirs, that my name is-" and here she
stopped for a moment, for she forgot the name the curate had given
her; but he came to her relief, seeing what her difficulty was, and
said, "It is no wonder, senora, that your highness should be confused
and embarrassed in telling the tale of your misfortunes; for such
afflictions often have the effect of depriving the sufferers of
memory, so that they do not even remember their own names, as is the
case now with your ladyship, who has forgotten that she is called the
Princess Micomicona, lawful heiress of the great kingdom of Micomicon;
and with this cue your highness may now recall to your sorrowful
recollection all you may wish to tell us." "That is the truth," said
the damsel; "but I think from this on I shall have no need of any
prompting, and I shall bring my true story safe into port, and here it
is. The king my father, who was called Tinacrio the Sapient, was very
learned in what they call magic arts, and became aware by his craft
that my mother, who was called Queen Jaramilla, was to die before he
did, and that soon after he too was to depart this life, and I was to
be left an orphan without father or mother. But all this, he declared,
did not so much grieve or distress him as his certain knowledge that a
prodigious giant, the lord of a great island close to our kingdom,
Pandafilando of the Scowl by name--for it is averred that, though his
eyes are properly placed and straight, he always looks askew as if he
squinted, and this he does out of malignity, to strike fear and terror
into those he looks at--that he knew, I say, that this giant on
becoming aware of my orphan condition would overrun my kingdom with a
mighty force and strip me of all, not leaving me even a small village
to shelter me; but that I could avoid all this ruin and misfortune if
I were willing to marry him; however, as far as he could see, he never
expected that I would consent to a marriage so unequal; and he said no
more than the truth in this, for it has never entered my mind to marry
that giant, or any other, let him be ever so great or enormous. My
father said, too, that when he was dead, and I saw Pandafilando about
to invade my kingdom, I was not to wait and attempt to defend myself,
for that would be destructive to me, but that I should leave the
kingdom entirely open to him if I wished to avoid the death and total
destruction of my good and loyal vassals, for there would be no
possibility of defending myself against the giant's devilish power;
and that I should at once with some of my followers set out for Spain,
where I should obtain relief in my distress on finding a certain
knight-errant whose fame by that time would extend over the whole
kingdom, and who would be called, if I remember rightly, Don Azote or
Don Gigote." "'Don Quixote,' he must have said, senora," observed
Sancho at this, "otherwise called the Knight of the Rueful
Countenance." "That is it," said Dorothea; "he said, moreover, that he
would be tall of stature and lank featured; and that on his right side
under the left shoulder, or thereabouts, he would have a grey mole
with hairs like bristles." On hearing this, Don Quixote said to his
squire, "Here, Sancho my son, bear a hand and help me to strip, for I
want to see if I am the knight that sage king foretold." "What does
your worship want to strip for?" said Dorothea. "To see if I have that
mole your father spoke of," answered Don Quixote. "There is no
occasion to strip," said Sancho; "for I know your worship has just
such a mole on the middle of your backbone, which is the mark of a
strong man." "That is enough," said Dorothea, "for with friends we
must not look too closely into trifles; and whether it be on the
shoulder or on the backbone matters little; it is enough if there is a
mole, be it where it may, for it is all the same flesh; no doubt my
good father hit the truth in every particular, and I have made a lucky
hit in commending myself to Don Quixote; for he is the one my father
spoke of, as the features of his countenance correspond with those
assigned to this knight by that wide fame he has acquired not only in
Spain but in all La Mancha; for I had scarcely landed at Osuna when I
heard such accounts of his achievements, that at once my heart told me
he was the very one I had come in search of." "But how did you land at
Osuna, senora," asked Don Quixote, "when it is not a seaport?" But
before Dorothea could reply the curate anticipated her, saying, "The
princess meant to say that after she had landed at Malaga the first
place where she heard of your worship was Osuna." "That is what I
meant to say," said Dorothea. "And that would be only natural," said
the curate. "Will your majesty please proceed?" "There is no more to
add," said Dorothea, "save that in finding Don Quixote I have had such
good fortune, that I already reckon and regard myself queen and
mistress of my entire dominions, since of his courtesy and magnanimity
he has granted me the boon of accompanying me whithersoever I may
conduct him, which will be only to bring him face to face with
Pandafilando of the Scowl, that he may slay him and restore to me what
has been unjustly usurped by him: for all this must come to pass
satisfactorily since my good father Tinacrio the Sapient foretold it,
who likewise left it declared in writing in Chaldee or Greek
characters (for I cannot read them), that if this predicted knight,
after having cut the giant's throat, should be disposed to marry me I
was to offer myself at once without demur as his lawful wife, and
yield him possession of my kingdom together with my person." "What
thinkest thou now, friend Sancho?" said Don Quixote at this. "Hearest
thou that? Did I not tell thee so? See how we have already got a
kingdom to govern and a queen to marry!" "On my oath it is so," said
Sancho; "and foul fortune to him who won't marry after slitting Senor
Pandahilado's windpipe! And then, how ill-favoured the queen is! I
wish the fleas in my bed were that sort!" And so saying he cut a
couple of capers in the air with every sign of extreme satisfaction,
and then ran to seize the bridle of Dorothea's mule, and checking it
fell on his knees before her, begging her to give him her hand to kiss
in token of his acknowledgment of her as his queen and mistress. Which
of the bystanders could have helped laughing to see the madness of the
master and the simplicity of the servant? Dorothea therefore gave her
hand, and promised to make him a great lord in her kingdom, when
Heaven should be so good as to permit her to recover and enjoy it, for
which Sancho returned thanks in words that set them all laughing
again. "This, sirs," continued Dorothea, "is my story; it only remains
to tell you that of all the attendants I took with me from my kingdom
I have none left except this well-bearded squire, for all were drowned
in a great tempest we encountered when in sight of port; and he and I
came to land on a couple of planks as if by a miracle; and indeed the
whole course of my life is a miracle and a mystery as you may have
observed; and if I have been over minute in any respect or not as
precise as I ought, let it be accounted for by what the licentiate
said at the beginning of my tale, that constant and excessive troubles
deprive the sufferers of their memory." "They shall not deprive me of
mine, exalted and worthy princess," said Don Quixote, "however great
and unexampled those which I shall endure in your service may be; and
here I confirm anew the boon I have promised you, and I swear to go
with you to the end of the world until I find myself in the presence
of your fierce enemy, whose haughty head I trust by the aid of my arm
to cut off with the edge of this--I will not say good sword, thanks to
Gines de Pasamonte who carried away mine"--(this he said between his
teeth, and then continued), "and when it has been cut off and you have
been put in peaceful possession of your realm it shall be left to your
own decision to dispose of your person as may be most pleasing to you;
for so long as my memory is occupied, my will enslaved, and my
understanding enthralled by her-I say no more--it is impossible for me
for a moment to contemplate marriage, even with a Phoenix." The last
words of his master about not wanting to marry were so disagreeable to
Sancho that raising his voice he exclaimed with great irritation: "By
my oath, Senor Don Quixote, you are not in your right senses; for how
can your worship possibly object to marrying such an exalted princess
as this? Do you think Fortune will offer you behind every stone such a
piece of luck as is offered you now? Is my lady Dulcinea fairer,
perchance? Not she; nor half as fair; and I will even go so far as to
say she does not come up to the shoe of this one here. A poor chance I
have of getting that county I am waiting for if your worship goes
looking for dainties in the bottom of the sea. In the devil's name,
marry, marry, and take this kingdom that comes to hand without any
trouble, and when you are king make me a marquis or governor of a
province, and for the rest let the devil take it all." Don Quixote,
when he heard such blasphemies uttered against his lady Dulcinea,
could not endure it, and lifting his pike, without saying anything to
Sancho or uttering a word, he gave him two such thwacks that he
brought him to the ground; and had it not been that Dorothea cried out
to him to spare him he would have no doubt taken his life on the spot.
"Do you think," he said to him after a pause, "you scurvy clown, that
you are to be always interfering with me, and that you are to be
always offending and I always pardoning? Don't fancy it, impious
scoundrel, for that beyond a doubt thou art, since thou hast set thy
tongue going against the peerless Dulcinea. Know you not, lout,
vagabond, beggar, that were it not for the might that she infuses into
my arm I should not have strength enough to kill a flea? Say, scoffer
with a viper's tongue, what think you has won this kingdom and cut off
this giant's head and made you a marquis (for all this I count as
already accomplished and decided), but the might of Dulcinea,
employing my arm as the instrument of her achievements? She fights in
me and conquers in me, and I live and breathe in her, and owe my life
and being to her. O whoreson scoundrel, how ungrateful you are, you
see yourself raised from the dust of the earth to be a titled lord,
and the return you make for so great a benefit is to speak evil of her
who has conferred it upon you!" Sancho was not so stunned but that he
heard all his master said, and rising with some degree of nimbleness
he ran to place himself behind Dorothea's palfrey, and from that
position he said to his master: "Tell me, senor; if your worship is
resolved not to marry this great princess, it is plain the kingdom
will not be yours; and not being so, how can you bestow favours upon
me? That is what I complain of. Let your worship at any rate marry
this queen, now that we have got her here as if showered down from
heaven, and afterwards you may go back to my lady Dulcinea; for there
must have been kings in the world who kept mistresses. As to beauty, I
have nothing to do with it; and if the truth is to be told, I cannot
persuade myself that the whipping of my backside has anything to do
with the disenchantment of the enchanted; it is like saying, 'If your
head aches rub ointment on your knees;' at any rate I'll make bold to
swear that in all the histories dealing with knight-errantry that your
worship has read you have never come across anybody disenchanted by
whipping; but whether or no I'll whip myself when I have a fancy for
it, and the opportunity serves for scourging myself comfortably." "God
grant it," said Don Quixote; "and heaven give thee grace to take it to
heart and own the obligation thou art under to help my lady, who is
thine also, inasmuch as thou art mine." As they pursued their journey
talking in this way they came to the very same spot where they had
been trampled on by the bulls. Don Quixote recognised it, and said he
to Sancho, "This is the meadow where we came upon those gay
shepherdesses and gallant shepherds who were trying to revive and
imitate the pastoral Arcadia there, an idea as novel as it was happy,
in emulation whereof, if so be thou dost approve of it, Sancho, I
would have ourselves turn shepherds, at any rate for the time I have
to live in retirement. I will buy some ewes and everything else
requisite for the pastoral calling; and, I under the name of the
shepherd Quixotize and thou as the shepherd Panzino, we will roam the
woods and groves and meadows singing songs here, lamenting in elegies
there, drinking of the crystal waters of the springs or limpid brooks
or flowing rivers. The oaks will yield us their sweet fruit with
bountiful hand, the trunks of the hard cork trees a seat, the willows
shade, the roses perfume, the widespread meadows carpets tinted with a
thousand dyes; the clear pure air will give us breath, the moon and
stars lighten the darkness of the night for us, song shall be our
delight, lamenting our joy, Apollo will supply us with verses, and
love with conceits whereby we shall make ourselves famed for ever, not
only in this but in ages to come." "Egad," said Sancho, "but that sort
of life squares, nay corners, with my notions; and what is more the
bachelor Samson Carrasco and Master Nicholas the barber won't have
well seen it before they'll want to follow it and turn shepherds along
with us; and God grant it may not come into the curate's head to join
the sheepfold too, he's so jovial and fond of enjoying himself." "Thou
art in the right of it, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "and I will take
thy advice as to accompanying the princess before going to see
Dulcinea; but I counsel thee not to say anything to any one, or to
those who are with us, about what we have considered and discussed,
for as Dulcinea is so decorous that she does not wish her thoughts to
be known it is not right that I or anyone for me should disclose
them." "Well then, if that be so," said Sancho, "how is it that your
worship makes all those you overcome by your arm go to present
themselves before my lady Dulcinea, this being the same thing as
signing your name to it that you love her and are her lover? And as
those who go must perforce kneel before her and say they come from
your worship to submit themselves to her, how can the thoughts of both
of you be hid?" "O, how silly and simple thou art!" said Don Quixote;
"seest thou not, Sancho, that this tends to her greater exaltation?
For thou must know that according to our way of thinking in chivalry,
it is a high honour to a lady to have many knights-errant in her
service, whose thoughts never go beyond serving her for her own sake,
and who look for no other reward for their great and true devotion
than that she should be willing to accept them as her knights." "It is
with that kind of love," said Sancho, "I have heard preachers say we
ought to love our Lord, for himself alone, without being moved by the
hope of glory or the fear of punishment; though for my part, I would
rather love and serve him for what he could do." "The devil take thee
for a clown!" said Don Quixote, "and what shrewd things thou sayest at
times! One would think thou hadst studied." "In faith, then, I cannot
even read." Master Nicholas here called out to them to wait a while,
as they wanted to halt and drink at a little spring there was there.
Don Quixote drew up, not a little to the satisfaction of Sancho, for
he was by this time weary of telling so many lies, and in dread of his
master catching him tripping, for though he knew that Dulcinea was a
peasant girl of El Toboso, he had never seen her in all his life.
Cardenio had now put on the clothes which Dorothea was wearing when
they found her, and though they were not very good, they were far
better than those he put off. They dismounted together by the side of
the spring, and with what the curate had provided himself with at the
inn they appeased, though not very well, the keen appetite they all of
them brought with them. While they were so employed there happened to
come by a youth passing on his way, who stopping to examine the party
at the spring, the next moment ran to Don Quixote and clasping him
round the legs, began to weep freely, saying, "O, senor, do you not
know me? Look at me well; I am that lad Andres that your worship
released from the oak-tree where I was tied." Don Quixote recognised
him, and taking his hand he turned to those present and said: "That
your worships may see how important it is to have knights-errant to
redress the wrongs and injuries done by tyrannical and wicked men in
this world, I may tell you that some days ago passing through a wood,
I heard cries and piteous complaints as of a person in pain and
distress; I immediately hastened, impelled by my bounden duty, to the
quarter whence the plaintive accents seemed to me to proceed, and I
found tied to an oak this lad who now stands before you, which in my
heart I rejoice at, for his testimony will not permit me to depart
from the truth in any particular. He was, I say, tied to an oak, naked
from the waist up, and a clown, whom I afterwards found to be his
master, was scarifying him by lashes with the reins of his mare. As
soon as I saw him I asked the reason of so cruel a flagellation. The
boor replied that he was flogging him because he was his servant and
because of carelessness that proceeded rather from dishonesty than
stupidity; on which this boy said, 'Senor, he flogs me only because I
ask for my wages.' The master made I know not what speeches and
explanations, which, though I listened to them, I did not accept. In
short, I compelled the clown to unbind him, and to swear he would take
him with him, and pay him real by real, and perfumed into the bargain.
Is not all this true, Andres my son? Didst thou not mark with what
authority I commanded him, and with what humility he promised to do
all I enjoined, specified, and required of him? Answer without
hesitation; tell these gentlemen what took place, that they may see
that it is as great an advantage as I say to have knights-errant
abroad." "All that your worship has said is quite true," answered the
lad; "but the end of the business turned out just the opposite of what
your worship supposes." "How! the opposite?" said Don Quixote; "did
not the clown pay thee then?" "Not only did he not pay me," replied
the lad, "but as soon as your worship had passed out of the wood and
we were alone, he tied me up again to the same oak and gave me a fresh
flogging, that left me like a flayed Saint Bartholomew; and every
stroke he gave me he followed up with some jest or gibe about having
made a fool of your worship, and but for the pain I was suffering I
should have laughed at the things he said. In short he left me in such
a condition that I have been until now in a hospital getting cured of
the injuries which that rascally clown inflicted on me then; for all
which your worship is to blame; for if you had gone your own way and
not come where there was no call for you, nor meddled in other
people's affairs, my master would have been content with giving me one
or two dozen lashes, and would have then loosed me and paid me what he
owed me; but when your worship abused him so out of measure, and gave
him so many hard words, his anger was kindled; and as he could not
revenge himself on you, as soon as he saw you had left him the storm
burst upon me in such a way, that I feel as if I should never be a man
again." "The mischief," said Don Quixote, "lay in my going away; for I
should not have gone until I had seen thee paid; because I ought to
have known well by long experience that there is no clown who will
keep his word if he finds it will not suit him to keep it; but thou
rememberest, Andres, that I swore if he did not pay thee I would go
and seek him, and find him though he were to hide himself in the
whale's belly." "That is true," said Andres; "but it was of no use."
"Thou shalt see now whether it is of use or not," said Don Quixote;
and so saying, he got up hastily and bade Sancho bridle Rocinante, who
was browsing while they were eating. Dorothea asked him what he meant
to do. He replied that he meant to go in search of this clown and
chastise him for such iniquitous conduct, and see Andres paid to the
last maravedi, despite and in the teeth of all the clowns in the
world. To which she replied that he must remember that in accordance
with his promise he could not engage in any enterprise until he had
concluded hers; and that as he knew this better than anyone, he should
restrain his ardour until his return from her kingdom. "That is true,"
said Don Quixote, "and what you had best do with him is to leave him
to take his chance whether he be lost or not, for the horses we shall
have when we come out victors will be so many that even Rocinante will
run a risk of being changed for another. But attend to me and observe,
for I wish to give thee some account of the chief knights who
accompany these two armies; and that thou mayest the better see and
mark, let us withdraw to that hillock which rises yonder, whence both
armies may be seen." They did so, and placed themselves on a rising
ground from which the two droves that Don Quixote made armies of might
have been plainly seen if the clouds of dust they raised had not
obscured them and blinded the sight; nevertheless, seeing in his
imagination what he did not see and what did not exist, he began thus
in a loud voice: "That knight whom thou seest yonder in yellow armour,
who bears upon his shield a lion crowned crouching at the feet of a
damsel, is the valiant Laurcalco, lord of the Silver Bridge; that one
in armour with flowers of gold, who bears on his shield three crowns
argent on an azure field, is the dreaded Micocolembo, grand duke of
Quirocia; that other of gigantic frame, on his right hand, is the ever
dauntless Brandabarbaran de Boliche, lord of the three Arabias, who
for armour wears that serpent skin, and has for shield a gate which,
according to tradition, is one of those of the temple that Samson
brought to the ground when by his death he revenged himself upon his
enemies. But turn thine eyes to the other side, and thou shalt see in
front and in the van of this other army the ever victorious and never
vanquished Timonel of Carcajona, prince of New Biscay, who comes in
armour with arms quartered azure, vert, white, and yellow, and bears
on his shield a cat or on a field tawny with a motto which says Miau,
which is the beginning of the name of his lady, who according to
report is the peerless Miaulina, daughter of the duke Alfeniquen of
the Algarve; the other, who burdens and presses the loins of that
powerful charger and bears arms white as snow and a shield blank and
without any device, is a novice knight, a Frenchman by birth, Pierres
Papin by name, lord of the baronies of Utrique; that other, who with
iron-shod heels strikes the flanks of that nimble parti-coloured
zebra, and for arms bears azure vair, is the mighty duke of Nerbia,
Espartafilardo del Bosque, who bears for device on his shield an
asparagus plant with a motto in Castilian that says, Rastrea mi
suerte." And so he went on naming a number of knights of one squadron
or the other out of his imagination, and to all he assigned off-hand
their arms, colours, devices, and mottoes, carried away by the
illusions of his unheard-of craze; and without a pause, he continued,
"People of divers nations compose this squadron in front; here are
those that drink of the sweet waters of the famous Xanthus, those that
scour the woody Massilian plains, those that sift the pure fine gold
of Arabia Felix, those that enjoy the famed cool banks of the crystal
Thermodon, those that in many and various ways divert the streams of
the golden Pactolus, the Numidians, faithless in their promises, the
Persians renowned in archery, the Parthians and the Medes that fight
as they fly, the Arabs that ever shift their dwellings, the Scythians
as cruel as they are fair, the Ethiopians with pierced lips, and an
infinity of other nations whose features I recognise and descry,
though I cannot recall their names. In this other squadron there come
those that drink of the crystal streams of the olive-bearing Betis,
those that make smooth their countenances with the water of the ever
rich and golden Tagus, those that rejoice in the fertilising flow of
the divine Genil, those that roam the Tartesian plains abounding in
pasture, those that take their pleasure in the Elysian meadows of
Jerez, the rich Manchegans crowned with ruddy ears of corn, the
wearers of iron, old relics of the Gothic race, those that bathe in
the Pisuerga renowned for its gentle current, those that feed their
herds along the spreading pastures of the winding Guadiana famed for
its hidden course, those that tremble with the cold of the pineclad
Pyrenees or the dazzling snows of the lofty Apennine; in a word, as
many as all Europe includes and contains." Good God! what a number of
countries and nations he named! giving to each its proper attributes
with marvellous readiness; brimful and saturated with what he had read
in his lying books! Sancho Panza hung upon his words without speaking,
and from time to time turned to try if he could see the knights and
giants his master was describing, and as he could not make out one of
them he said to him: "Senor, devil take it if there's a sign of any
man you talk of, knight or giant, in the whole thing; maybe it's all
enchantment, like the phantoms last night." "How canst thou say that!"
answered Don Quixote; "dost thou not hear the neighing of the steeds,
the braying of the trumpets, the roll of the drums?" "I hear nothing
but a great bleating of ewes and sheep," said Sancho; which was true,
for by this time the two flocks had come close. "The fear thou art in,
Sancho," said Don Quixote, "prevents thee from seeing or hearing
correctly, for one of the effects of fear is to derange the senses and
make things appear different from what they are; if thou art in such
fear, withdraw to one side and leave me to myself, for alone I suffice
to bring victory to that side to which I shall give my aid;" and so
saying he gave Rocinante the spur, and Sancho followed him on foot and
loaded, and after having partly made the circuit of the mountain they
found lying in a ravine, dead and half devoured by dogs and pecked by
jackdaws, a mule saddled and bridled, all which still further
strengthened their suspicion that he who had fled was the owner of the
mule and the saddle-pad. As they stood looking at it they heard a
whistle like that of a shepherd watching his flock, and suddenly on
their left there appeared a great number of goats and behind them on
the summit of the mountain the goatherd in charge of them, a man
advanced in years. Don Quixote called aloud to him and begged him to
come down to where they stood. He shouted in return, asking what had
brought them to that spot, seldom or never trodden except by the feet
of goats, or of the wolves and other wild beasts that roamed around.
Sancho in return bade him come down, and they would explain all to
him. The goatherd descended, and reaching the place where Don Quixote
stood, he said, "I will wager you are looking at that hack mule that
lies dead in the hollow there, and, faith, it has been lying there now
these six months; tell me, have you come upon its master about here?"
"We have come upon nobody," answered Don Quixote, "nor on anything
except a saddle-pad and a little valise that we found not far from
this." "I found it too," said the goatherd, "but I would not lift it
nor go near it for fear of some ill-luck or being charged with theft,
for the devil is crafty, and things rise up under one's feet to make
one fall without knowing why or wherefore." "That's exactly what I
say," said Sancho; "I found it too, and I would not go within a
stone's throw of it; there I left it, and there it lies just as it
was, for I don't want a dog with a bell." "Tell me, good man," said
Don Quixote, "do you know who is the owner of this property?" "All I
can tell you," said the goatherd, "is that about six months ago, more
or less, there arrived at a shepherd's hut three leagues, perhaps,
away from this, a youth of well-bred appearance and manners, mounted
on that same mule which lies dead here, and with the same saddle-pad
and valise which you say you found and did not touch. He asked us what
part of this sierra was the most rugged and retired; we told him that
it was where we now are; and so in truth it is, for if you push on
half a league farther, perhaps you will not be able to find your way
out; and I am wondering how you have managed to come here, for there
is no road or path that leads to this spot. I say, then, that on
hearing our answer the youth turned about and made for the place we
pointed out to him, leaving us all charmed with his good looks, and
wondering at his question and the haste with which we saw him depart
in the direction of the sierra; and after that we saw him no more,
until some days afterwards he crossed the path of one of our
shepherds, and without saying a word to him, came up to him and gave
him several cuffs and kicks, and then turned to the ass with our
provisions and took all the bread and cheese it carried, and having
done this made off back again into the sierra with extraordinary
swiftness. When some of us goatherds learned this we went in search of
him for about two days through the most remote portion of this sierra,
at the end of which we found him lodged in the hollow of a large thick
cork tree. He came out to meet us with great gentleness, with his
dress now torn and his face so disfigured and burned by the sun, that
we hardly recognised him but that his clothes, though torn, convinced
us, from the recollection we had of them, that he was the person we
were looking for. He saluted us courteously, and in a few well-spoken
words he told us not to wonder at seeing him going about in this
guise, as it was binding upon him in order that he might work out a
penance which for his many sins had been imposed upon him. We asked
him to tell us who he was, but we were never able to find out from
him: we begged of him too, when he was in want of food, which he could
not do without, to tell us where we should find him, as we would bring
it to him with all good-will and readiness; or if this were not to his
taste, at least to come and ask it of us and not take it by force from
the shepherds. He thanked us for the offer, begged pardon for the late
assault, and promised for the future to ask it in God's name without
offering violence to anybody. As for fixed abode, he said he had no
other than that which chance offered wherever night might overtake
him; and his words ended in an outburst of weeping so bitter that we
who listened to him must have been very stones had we not joined him
in it, comparing what we saw of him the first time with what we saw
now; for, as I said, he was a graceful and gracious youth, and in his
courteous and polished language showed himself to be of good birth and
courtly breeding, and rustics as we were that listened to him, even to
our rusticity his gentle bearing sufficed to make it plain. "But in
the midst of his conversation he stopped and became silent, keeping
his eyes fixed upon the ground for some time, during which we stood
still waiting anxiously to see what would come of this abstraction;
and with no little pity, for from his behaviour, now staring at the
ground with fixed gaze and eyes wide open without moving an eyelid,
again closing them, compressing his lips and raising his eyebrows, we
could perceive plainly that a fit of madness of some kind had come
upon him; and before long he showed that what we imagined was the
truth, for he arose in a fury from the ground where he had thrown
himself, and attacked the first he found near him with such rage and
fierceness that if we had not dragged him off him, he would have
beaten or bitten him to death, all the while exclaiming, 'Oh faithless
Fernando, here, here shalt thou pay the penalty of the wrong thou hast
done me; these hands shall tear out that heart of thine, abode and
dwelling of all iniquity, but of deceit and fraud above all; and to
these he added other words all in effect upbraiding this Fernando and
charging him with treachery and faithlessness. "We forced him to
release his hold with no little difficulty, and without another word
he left us, and rushing off plunged in among these brakes and
brambles, so as to make it impossible for us to follow him; from this
we suppose that madness comes upon him from time to time, and that
some one called Fernando must have done him a wrong of a grievous
nature such as the condition to which it had brought him seemed to
show. All this has been since then confirmed on those occasions, and
they have been many, on which he has crossed our path, at one time to
beg the shepherds to give him some of the food they carry, at another
to take it from them by force; for when there is a fit of madness upon
him, even though the shepherds offer it freely, he will not accept it
but snatches it from them by dint of blows; but when he is in his
senses he begs it for the love of God, courteously and civilly, and
receives it with many thanks and not a few tears. And to tell you the
truth, sirs," continued the goatherd, "it was yesterday that we
resolved, I and four of the lads, two of them our servants, and the
other two friends of mine, to go in search of him until we find him,
and when we do to take him, whether by force or of his own consent, to
the town of Almodovar, which is eight leagues from this, and there
strive to cure him (if indeed his malady admits of a cure), or learn
when he is in his senses who he is, and if he has relatives to whom we
may give notice of his misfortune. This, sirs, is all I can say in
answer to what you have asked me; and be sure that the owner of the
articles you found is he whom you saw pass by with such nimbleness and
so naked." For Don Quixote had already described how he had seen the
man go bounding along the mountain side, and he was now filled with
amazement at what he heard from the goatherd, and more eager than ever
to discover who the unhappy madman was; and in his heart he resolved,
as he had done before, to search for him all over the mountain, not
leaving a corner or cave unexamined until he had found him. But chance
arranged matters better than he expected or hoped, for at that very
moment, in a gorge on the mountain that opened where they stood, the
youth he wished to find made his appearance, coming along talking to
himself in a way that would have been unintelligible near at hand,
much more at a distance. His garb was what has been described, save
that as he drew near, Don Quixote perceived that a tattered doublet
which he wore was amber-tanned, from which he concluded that one who
wore such garments could not be of very low rank. Approaching them,
the youth greeted them in a harsh and hoarse voice but with great
courtesy. Don Quixote returned his salutation with equal politeness,
and dismounting from Rocinante advanced with well-bred bearing and
grace to embrace him, and held him for some time close in his arms as
if he had known him for a long time. The other, whom we may call the
Ragged One of the Sorry Countenance, as Don Quixote was of the Rueful,
after submitting to the embrace pushed him back a little and, placing
his hands on Don Quixote's shoulders, stood gazing at him as if
seeking to see whether he knew him, not less amazed, perhaps, at the
sight of the face, figure, and armour of Don Quixote than Don Quixote
was at the sight of him. To be brief, the first to speak after
embracing was the Ragged One, and he said what will be told farther
on. CHAPTER XXIV. IN WHICH IS CONTINUED THE ADVENTURE OF THE SIERRA
MORENA The history relates that it was with the greatest attention Don
Quixote listened to the ragged knight of the Sierra, who began by
saying: "Of a surety, senor, whoever you are, for I know you not, I
thank you for the proofs of kindness and courtesy you have shown me,
and would I were in a condition to requite with something more than
good-will that which you have displayed towards me in the cordial
reception you have given me; but my fate does not afford me any other
means of returning kindnesses done me save the hearty desire to repay
them." "Mine," replied Don Quixote, "is to be of service to you, so
much so that I had resolved not to quit these mountains until I had
found you, and learned of you whether there is any kind of relief to
be found for that sorrow under which from the strangeness of your life
you seem to labour; and to search for you with all possible diligence,
if search had been necessary. And if your misfortune should prove to
be one of those that refuse admission to any sort of consolation, it
was my purpose to join you in lamenting and mourning over it, so far
as I could; for it is still some comfort in misfortune to find one who
can feel for it. And if my good intentions deserve to be acknowledged
with any kind of courtesy, I entreat you, senor, by that which I
perceive you possess in so high a degree, and likewise conjure you by
whatever you love or have loved best in life, to tell me who you are
and the cause that has brought you to live or die in these solitudes
like a brute beast, dwelling among them in a manner so foreign to your
condition as your garb and appearance show. And I swear," added Don
Quixote, "by the order of knighthood which I have received, and by my
vocation of knight-errant, if you gratify me in this, to serve you
with all the zeal my calling demands of me, either in relieving your
misfortune if it admits of relief, or in joining you in lamenting it
as I promised to do." The Knight of the Thicket, hearing him of the
Rueful Countenance talk in this strain, did nothing but stare at him,
and stare at him again, and again survey him from head to foot; and
when he had thoroughly examined him, he said to him: "If you have
anything to give me to eat, for God's sake give it me, and after I
have eaten I will do all you ask in acknowledgment of the goodwill you
have displayed towards me." Sancho from his sack, and the goatherd
from his pouch, furnished the Ragged One with the means of appeasing
his hunger, and what they gave him he ate like a half-witted being, so
hastily that he took no time between mouthfuls, gorging rather than
swallowing; and while he ate neither he nor they who observed him
uttered a word. As soon as he had done he made signs to them to follow
him, which they did, and he led them to a green plot which lay a
little farther off round the corner of a rock. On reaching it he
stretched himself upon the grass, and the others did the same, all
keeping silence, until the Ragged One, settling himself in his place,
said: "If it is your wish, sirs, that I should disclose in a few words
the surpassing extent of my misfortunes, you must promise not to break
the thread of my sad story with any question or other interruption,
for the instant you do so the tale I tell will come to an end." These
words of the Ragged One reminded Don Quixote of the tale his squire
had told him, when he failed to keep count of the goats that had
crossed the river and the story remained unfinished; but to return to
the Ragged One, he went on to say: "I give you this warning because I
wish to pass briefly over the story of my misfortunes, for recalling
them to memory only serves to add fresh ones, and the less you
question me the sooner shall I make an end of the recital, though I
shall not omit to relate anything of importance in order fully to
satisfy your curiosity." Don Quixote gave the promise for himself and
the others, and with this assurance he began as follows: "My name is
Cardenio, my birthplace one of the best cities of this Andalusia, my
family noble, my parents rich, my misfortune so great that my parents
must have wept and my family grieved over it without being able by
their wealth to lighten it; for the gifts of fortune can do little to
relieve reverses sent by Heaven. In that same country there was a
heaven in which love had placed all the glory I could desire; such was
the beauty of Luscinda, a damsel as noble and as rich as I, but of
happier fortunes, and of less firmness than was due to so worthy a
passion as mine. This Luscinda I loved, worshipped, and adored from my
earliest and tenderest years, and she loved me in all the innocence
and sincerity of childhood. Our parents were aware of our feelings,
and were not sorry to perceive them, for they saw clearly that as they
ripened they must lead at last to a marriage between us, a thing that
seemed almost prearranged by the equality of our families and wealth.
We grew up, and with our growth grew the love between us, so that the
father of Luscinda felt bound for propriety's sake to refuse me
admission to his house, in this perhaps imitating the parents of that
Thisbe so celebrated by the poets, and this refusal but added love to
love and flame to flame; for though they enforced silence upon our
tongues they could not impose it upon our pens, which can make known
the heart's secrets to a loved one more freely than tongues; for many
a time the presence of the object of love shakes the firmest will and
strikes dumb the boldest tongue. Ah heavens! how many letters did I
write her, and how many dainty modest replies did I receive! how many
ditties and love-songs did I compose in which my heart declared and
made known its feelings, described its ardent longings, revelled in
its recollections and dallied with its desires! At length growing
impatient and feeling my heart languishing with longing to see her, I
resolved to put into execution and carry out what seemed to me the
best mode of winning my desired and merited reward, to ask her of her
father for my lawful wife, which I did. To this his answer was that he
thanked me for the disposition I showed to do honour to him and to the
occasion, and to gratify him in every way he could; but when the
wedding days were over and the succession of visits and
congratulations had slackened, he began purposely to leave off going
to the house of Anselmo, for it seemed to him, as it naturally would
to all men of sense, that friends' houses ought not to be visited
after marriage with the same frequency as in their masters' bachelor
days: because, though true and genuine friendship cannot and should
not be in any way suspicious, still a married man's honour is a thing
of such delicacy that it is held liable to injury from brothers, much
more from friends. Anselmo remarked the cessation of Lothario's
visits, and complained of it to him, saying that if he had known that
marriage was to keep him from enjoying his society as he used, he
would have never married; and that, if by the thorough harmony that
subsisted between them while he was a bachelor they had earned such a
sweet name as that of "The Two Friends," he should not allow a title
so rare and so delightful to be lost through a needless anxiety to act
circumspectly; and so he entreated him, if such a phrase was allowable
between them, to be once more master of his house and to come in and
go out as formerly, assuring him that his wife Camilla had no other
desire or inclination than that which he would wish her to have, and
that knowing how sincerely they loved one another she was grieved to
see such coldness in him. To all this and much more that Anselmo said
to Lothario to persuade him to come to his house as he had been in the
habit of doing, Lothario replied with so much prudence, sense, and
judgment, that Anselmo was satisfied of his friend's good intentions,
and it was agreed that on two days in the week, and on holidays,
Lothario should come to dine with him; but though this arrangement was
made between them Lothario resolved to observe it no further than he
considered to be in accordance with the honour of his friend, whose
good name was more to him than his own. He said, and justly, that a
married man upon whom heaven had bestowed a beautiful wife should
consider as carefully what friends he brought to his house as what
female friends his wife associated with, for what cannot be done or
arranged in the market-place, in church, at public festivals or at
stations (opportunities that husbands cannot always deny their wives),
may be easily managed in the house of the female friend or relative in
whom most confidence is reposed. Lothario said, too, that every
married man should have some friend who would point out to him any
negligence he might be guilty of in his conduct, for it will sometimes
happen that owing to the deep affection the husband bears his wife
either he does not caution her, or, not to vex her, refrains from
telling her to do or not to do certain things, doing or avoiding which
may be a matter of honour or reproach to him; and errors of this kind
he could easily correct if warned by a friend. But where is such a
friend to be found as Lothario would have, so judicious, so loyal, and
so true? Of a truth I know not; Lothario alone was such a one, for
with the utmost care and vigilance he watched over the honour of his
friend, and strove to diminish, cut down, and reduce the number of
days for going to his house according to their agreement, lest the
visits of a young man, wealthy, high-born, and with the attractions he
was conscious of possessing, at the house of a woman so beautiful as
Camilla, should be regarded with suspicion by the inquisitive and
malicious eyes of the idle public. For though his integrity and
reputation might bridle slanderous tongues, still he was unwilling to
hazard either his own good name or that of his friend; and for this
reason most of the days agreed upon he devoted to some other business
which he pretended was unavoidable; so that a great portion of the day
was taken up with complaints on one side and excuses on the other. It
happened, however, that on one occasion when the two were strolling
together outside the city, Anselmo addressed the following words to
Lothario. "Thou mayest suppose, Lothario my friend, that I am unable
to give sufficient thanks for the favours God has rendered me in
making me the son of such parents as mine were, and bestowing upon me
with no niggard hand what are called the gifts of nature as well as
those of fortune, and above all for what he has done in giving me thee
for a friend and Camilla for a wife--two treasures that I value, if
not as highly as I ought, at least as highly as I am able. And yet,
with all these good things, which are commonly all that men need to
enable them to live happily, I am the most discontented and
dissatisfied man in the whole world; for, I know not how long since, I
have been harassed and oppressed by a desire so strange and so
unusual, that I wonder at myself and blame and chide myself when I am
alone, and strive to stifle it and hide it from my own thoughts, and
with no better success than if I were endeavouring deliberately to
publish it to all the world; and as, in short, it must come out, I
would confide it to thy safe keeping, feeling sure that by this means,
and by thy readiness as a true friend to afford me relief, I shall
soon find myself freed from the distress it causes me, and that thy
care will give me happiness in the same degree as my own folly has
caused me misery." The words of Anselmo struck Lothario with
astonishment, unable as he was to conjecture the purport of such a
lengthy preamble; and though be strove to imagine what desire it could
be that so troubled his friend, his conjectures were all far from the
truth, and to relieve the anxiety which this perplexity was causing
him, he told him he was doing a flagrant injustice to their great
friendship in seeking circuitous methods of confiding to him his most
hidden thoughts, for he well knew he might reckon upon his counsel in
diverting them, or his help in carrying them into effect. "That is the
truth," replied Anselmo, "and relying upon that I will tell thee,
friend Lothario, that the desire which harasses me is that of knowing
whether my wife Camilla is as good and as perfect as I think her to
be; and I cannot satisfy myself of the truth on this point except by
testing her in such a way that the trial may prove the purity of her
virtue as the fire proves that of gold; because I am persuaded, my
friend, that a woman is virtuous only in proportion as she is or is
not tempted; and that she alone is strong who does not yield to the
promises, gifts, tears, and importunities of earnest lovers; for what
thanks does a woman deserve for being good if no one urges her to be
bad, and what wonder is it that she is reserved and circumspect to
whom no opportunity is given of going wrong and who knows she has a
husband that will take her life the first time he detects her in an
impropriety? I do not therefore hold her who is virtuous through fear
or want of opportunity in the same estimation as her who comes out of
temptation and trial with a crown of victory; and so, for these
reasons and many others that I could give thee to justify and support
the opinion I hold, I am desirous that my wife Camilla should pass
this crisis, and be refined and tested by the fire of finding herself
wooed and by one worthy to set his affections upon her; and if she
comes out, as I know she will, victorious from this struggle, I shall
look upon my good fortune as unequalled, I shall be able to say that
the cup of my desire is full, and that the virtuous woman of whom the
sage says 'Who shall find her?' has fallen to my lot. And if the
result be the contrary of what I expect, in the satisfaction of
knowing that I have been right in my opinion, I shall bear without
complaint the pain which my so dearly bought experience will naturally
cause me. And, as nothing of all thou wilt urge in opposition to my
wish will avail to keep me from carrying it into effect, it is my
desire, friend Lothario, that thou shouldst consent to become the
instrument for effecting this purpose that I am bent upon, for I will
afford thee opportunities to that end, and nothing shall be wanting
that I may think necessary for the pursuit of a virtuous, honourable,
modest and high-minded woman. And among other reasons, I am induced to
entrust this arduous task to thee by the consideration that if Camilla
be conquered by thee the conquest will not be pushed to extremes, but
only far enough to account that accomplished which from a sense of
honour will be left undone; thus I shall not be wronged in anything
more than intention, and my wrong will remain buried in the integrity
of thy silence, which I know well will be as lasting as that of death
in what concerns me. If, therefore, thou wouldst have me enjoy what
can be called life, thou wilt at once engage in this love struggle,
not lukewarmly nor slothfully, but with the energy and zeal that my
desire demands, and with the loyalty our friendship assures me of."
Such were the words Anselmo addressed to Lothario, who listened to
them with such attention that, except to say what has been already
mentioned, he did not open his lips until the other had finished. Then
perceiving that he had no more to say, after regarding him for awhile,
as one would regard something never before seen that excited wonder
and amazement, he said to him, "I cannot persuade myself, Anselmo my
friend, that what thou hast said to me is not in jest; if I thought
that thou wert speaking seriously I would not have allowed thee to go
so far; so as to put a stop to thy long harangue by not listening to
thee I verily suspect that either thou dost not know me, or I do not
know thee; but no, I know well thou art Anselmo, and thou knowest that
I am Lothario; the misfortune is, it seems to me, that thou art not
the Anselmo thou wert, and must have thought that I am not the
Lothario I should be; for the things that thou hast said to me are not
those of that Anselmo who was my friend, nor are those that thou
demandest of me what should be asked of the Lothario thou knowest.
True friends will prove their friends and make use of them, as a poet
has said, usque ad aras; whereby he meant that they will not make use
of their friendship in things that are contrary to God's will. If
this, then, was a heathen's feeling about friendship, how much more
should it be a Christian's, who knows that the divine must not be
forfeited for the sake of any human friendship? And if a friend should
go so far as to put aside his duty to Heaven to fulfil his duty to his
friend, it should not be in matters that are trifling or of little
moment, but in such as affect the friend's life and honour. Now tell
me, Anselmo, in which of these two art thou imperilled, that I should
hazard myself to gratify thee, and do a thing so detestable as that
thou seekest of me? Neither forsooth; on the contrary, thou dost ask
of me, so far as I understand, to strive and labour to rob thee of
honour and life, and to rob myself of them at the same time; for if I
take away thy honour it is plain I take away thy life, as a man
without honour is worse than dead; and being the instrument, as thou
wilt have it so, of so much wrong to thee, shall not I, too, be left
without honour, and consequently without life? Listen to me, Anselmo
my friend, and be not impatient to answer me until I have said what
occurs to me touching the object of thy desire, for there will be time
enough left for thee to reply and for me to hear." "Be it so," said
Anselmo, "say what thou wilt." Lothario then went on to say, "It seems
to me, Anselmo, that thine is just now the temper of mind which is
always that of the Moors, who can never be brought to see the error of
their creed by quotations from the Holy Scriptures, or by reasons
which depend upon the examination of the understanding or are founded
upon the articles of faith, but must have examples that are palpable,
easy, intelligible, capable of proof, not admitting of doubt, with
mathematical demonstrations that cannot be denied, like, 'If equals be
taken from equals, the remainders are equal:' and if they do not
understand this in words, and indeed they do not, it has to be shown
to them with the hands, and put before their eyes, and even with all
this no one succeeds in convincing them of the truth of our holy
religion. This same mode of proceeding I shall have to adopt with
thee, for the desire which has sprung up in thee is so absurd and
remote from everything that has a semblance of reason, that I feel it
would be a waste of time to employ it in reasoning with thy
simplicity, for at present I will call it by no other name; and I am
even tempted to leave thee in thy folly as a punishment for thy
pernicious desire; but the friendship I bear thee, which will not
allow me to desert thee in such manifest danger of destruction, keeps
me from dealing so harshly by thee. And that thou mayest clearly see
this, say, Anselmo, hast thou not told me that I must force my suit
upon a modest woman, decoy one that is virtuous, make overtures to one
that is pure-minded, pay court to one that is prudent? Yes, thou hast
told me so. Then, if thou knowest that thou hast a wife, modest,
virtuous, pure-minded and prudent, what is it that thou seekest? And
if thou believest that she will come forth victorious from all my
attacks--as doubtless she would--what higher titles than those she
possesses now dost thou think thou canst upon her then, or in what
will she be better then than she is now? Either thou dost not hold her
to be what thou why dost thou seek to prove her instead of treating
her as guilty in the way that may seem best to thee? but if she be as
virtuous as thou believest, it is an uncalled-for proceeding to make
trial of truth itself, for, after trial, it will but be in the same
estimation as before. Thus, then, it is conclusive that to attempt
things from which harm rather than advantage may come to us is the
part of unreasoning and reckless minds, more especially when they are
things which we are not forced or compelled to attempt, and which show
from afar that it is plainly madness to attempt them. "Difficulties
are attempted either for the sake of God or for the sake of the world,
or for both; those undertaken for God's sake are those which the
saints undertake when they attempt to live the lives of angels in
human bodies; those undertaken for the sake of the world are those of
the men who traverse such a vast expanse of water, such a variety of
climates, so many strange countries, to acquire what are called the
blessings of fortune; and those undertaken for the sake of God and the
world together are those of brave soldiers, who no sooner do they see
in the enemy's wall a breach as wide as a cannon ball could make,
than, casting aside all fear, without hesitating, or heeding the
manifest peril that threatens them, borne onward by the desire of
defending their faith, their country, and their king, they fling
themselves dauntlessly into the midst of the thousand opposing deaths
that await them. Such are the things that men are wont to attempt, and
there is honour, glory, gain, in attempting them, however full of
difficulty and peril they may be; but that which thou sayest it is thy
wish to attempt and carry out will not win thee the glory of God nor
the blessings of fortune nor fame among men; for even if the issue he
as thou wouldst have it, thou wilt be no happier, richer, or more
honoured than thou art this moment; and if it be otherwise thou wilt
be reduced to misery greater than can be imagined, for then it will
avail thee nothing to reflect that no one is aware of the misfortune
that has befallen thee; it will suffice to torture and crush thee that
thou knowest it thyself. And in confirmation of the truth of what I
say, here is Don Quixote himself, who will maintain it by arms, on
foot or on horseback or in any way you please." And so saying he stood
up and laid his hand on his sword, waiting to see what the Knight of
the Grove would do, who in an equally calm voice said in reply,
"Pledges don't distress a good payer; he who has succeeded in
vanquishing you once when transformed, Sir Don Quixote, may fairly
hope to subdue you in your own proper shape; but as it is not becoming
for knights to perform their feats of arms in the dark, like
highwaymen and bullies, let us wait till daylight, that the sun may
behold our deeds; and the conditions of our combat shall be that the
vanquished shall be at the victor's disposal, to do all that he may
enjoin, provided the injunction be such as shall be becoming a
knight." "I am more than satisfied with these conditions and terms,"
replied Don Quixote; and so saying, they betook themselves to where
their squires lay, and found them snoring, and in the same posture
they were in when sleep fell upon them. They roused them up, and bade
them get the horses ready, as at sunrise they were to engage in a
bloody and arduous single combat; at which intelligence Sancho was
aghast and thunderstruck, trembling for the safety of his master
because of the mighty deeds he had heard the squire of the Grove
ascribe to his; but without a word the two squires went in quest of
their cattle; for by this time the three horses and the ass had smelt
one another out, and were all together. On the way, he of the Grove
said to Sancho, "A hard life it is we lead and live, senor, we that
are squires to knights-errant; verily, we eat our bread in the sweat
of our faces, which is one of the curses God laid on our first
parents." "It may be said, too," added Sancho, "that we eat it in the
chill of our bodies; for who gets more heat and cold than the
miserable squires of knight-errantry? Even so it would not be so bad
if we had something to eat, for woes are lighter if there's bread; but
sometimes we go a day or two without breaking our fast, except with
the wind that blows." "All that," said he of the Grove, "may be
endured and put up with when we have hopes of reward; for, unless the
knight-errant he serves is excessively unlucky, after a few turns the
squire will at least find himself rewarded with a fine government of
some island or some fair county." "I," said Sancho, "have already told
my master that I shall be content with the government of some island,
and he is so noble and generous that he has promised it to me ever so
many times." "I," said he of the Grove, "shall be satisfied with a
canonry for my services, and my master has already assigned me one."
"Your master," said Sancho, "no doubt is a knight in the Church line,
and can bestow rewards of that sort on his good squire; but mine is
only a layman; though I remember some clever, but, to my mind,
designing people, strove to persuade him to try and become an
archbishop. He, however, would not be anything but an emperor; but I
was trembling all the time lest he should take a fancy to go into the
Church, not finding myself fit to hold office in it; for I may tell
you, though I seem a man, I am no better than a beast for the Church."
"Well, then, you are wrong there," said he of the Grove; "for those
island governments are not all satisfactory; some are awkward, some
are poor, some are dull, and, in short, the highest and choicest
brings with it a heavy burden of cares and troubles which the unhappy
wight to whose lot it has fallen bears upon his shoulders. Far better
would it be for us who have adopted this accursed service to go back
to our own houses, and there employ ourselves in pleasanter
occupations--in hunting or fishing, for instance; for what squire in
the world is there so poor as not to have a hack and a couple of
greyhounds and a fishingrod to amuse himself with in his own village?"
"I am not in want of any of those things," said Sancho; "to be sure I
have no hack, but I have an ass that is worth my master's horse twice
over; God send me a bad Easter, and that the next one I am to see, if
I would swap, even if I got four bushels of barley to boot. You will
laugh at the value I put on my Dapple--for dapple is the colour of my
beast. As to greyhounds, I can't want for them, for there are enough
and to spare in my town; and, moreover, there is more pleasure in
sport when it is at other people's expense." "In truth and earnest,
sir squire," said he of the Grove, "I have made up my mind and
determined to have done with these drunken vagaries of these knights,
and go back to my village, and bring up my children; for I have three,
like three Oriental pearls." "I have two," said Sancho, "that might be
presented before the Pope himself, especially a girl whom I am
breeding up for a countess, please God, though in spite of her
mother." "And how old is this lady that is being bred up for a
countess?" asked he of the Grove. "Fifteen, a couple of years more or
less," answered Sancho; "but she is as tall as a lance, and as fresh
as an April morning, and as strong as a porter." "Those are gifts to
fit her to be not only a countess but a nymph of the greenwood," said
he of the Grove; "whoreson strumpet! what pith the rogue must have!"
To which Sancho made answer, somewhat sulkily, "She's no strumpet, nor
was her mother, nor will either of them be, please God, while I live;
speak more civilly; for one bred up among knights-errant, who are
courtesy itself, your words don't seem to me to be very becoming." "O
how little you know about compliments, sir squire," returned he of the
Grove. "What! don't you know that when a horseman delivers a good
lance thrust at the bull in the plaza, or when anyone does anything
very well, the people are wont to say, 'Ha, whoreson rip! how well he
has done it!' and that what seems to be abuse in the expression is
high praise? Disown sons and daughters, senor, who don't do what
deserves that compliments of this sort should be paid to their
parents." "I do disown them," replied Sancho, "and in this way, and by
the same reasoning, you might call me and my children and my wife all
the strumpets in the world, for all they do and say is of a kind that
in the highest degree deserves the same praise; and to see them again
I pray God to deliver me from mortal sin, or, what comes to the same
thing, to deliver me from this perilous calling of squire into which I
have fallen a second time, decayed and beguiled by a purse with a
hundred ducats that I found one day in the heart of the Sierra Morena;
and the devil is always putting a bag full of doubloons before my
eyes, here, there, everywhere, until I fancy at every stop I am
putting my hand on it, and hugging it, and carrying it home with me,
and making investments, and getting interest, and living like a
prince; and so long as I think of this I make light of all the
hardships I endure with this simpleton of a master of mine, who, I
well know, is more of a madman than a knight." "There's why they say
that 'covetousness bursts the bag,'" said he of the Grove; "but if you
come to talk of that sort, there is not a greater one in the world
than my master, for he is one of those of whom they say, 'the cares of
others kill the ass;' for, in order that another knight may recover
the senses he has lost, he makes a madman of himself and goes looking
for what, when found, may, for all I know, fly in his own face." "And
is he in love perchance?" asked Sancho. "He is," said of the Grove,
"with one Casildea de Vandalia, the rawest and best roasted lady the
whole world could produce; but that rawness is not the only foot he
limps on, for he has greater schemes rumbling in his bowels, as will
be seen before many hours are over." "There's no road so smooth but it
has some hole or hindrance in it," said Sancho; "in other houses they
cook beans, but in mine it's by the potful; madness will have more
followers and hangers-on than sound sense; but if there be any truth
in the common saying, that to have companions in trouble gives some
relief, I may take consolation from you, inasmuch as you serve a
master as crazy as my own." "Crazy but valiant," replied he of the
Grove, "and more roguish than crazy or valiant." "Mine is not that,"
said Sancho; "I mean he has nothing of the rogue in him; on the
contrary, he has the soul of a pitcher; he has no thought of doing
harm to anyone, only good to all, nor has he any malice whatever in
him; a child might persuade him that it is night at noonday; and for
this simplicity I love him as the core of my heart, and I can't bring
myself to leave him, let him do ever such foolish things." "For all
that, brother and senor," said he of the Grove, "if the blind lead the
blind, both are in danger of falling into the pit. It is better for us
to beat a quiet retreat and get back to our own quarters; for those
who seek adventures don't always find good ones." Sancho kept spitting
from time to time, and his spittle seemed somewhat ropy and dry,
observing which the compassionate squire of the Grove said, "It seems
to me that with all this talk of ours our tongues are sticking to the
roofs of our mouths; but I have a pretty good loosener hanging from
the saddle-bow of my horse," and getting up he came back the next
minute with a large bota of wine and a pasty half a yard across; and
this is no exaggeration, for it was made of a house rabbit so big that
Sancho, as he handled it, took it to be made of a goat, not to say a
kid, and looking at it he said, "And do you carry this with you,
senor?" "Why, what are you thinking about?" said the other; "do you
take me for some paltry squire? I carry a better larder on my horse's
croup than a general takes with him when he goes on a march." Sancho
ate without requiring to be pressed, and in the dark bolted mouthfuls
like the knots on a tether, and said he, "You are a proper trusty
squire, one of the right sort, sumptuous and grand, as this banquet
shows, which, if it has not come here by magic art, at any rate has
the look of it; not like me, unlucky beggar, that have nothing more in
my alforjas than a scrap of cheese, so hard that one might brain a
giant with it, and, to keep it company, a few dozen carobs and as many
more filberts and walnuts; thanks to the austerity of my master, and
the idea he has and the rule he follows, that knights-errant must not
live or sustain themselves on anything except dried fruits and the
herbs of the field." "By my faith, brother," said he of the Grove, "my
stomach is not made for thistles, or wild pears, or roots of the
woods; let our masters do as they like, with their chivalry notions
and laws, and eat what those enjoin; I carry my prog-basket and this
bota hanging to the saddle-bow, whatever they may say; and it is such
an object of worship with me, and I love it so, that there is hardly a
moment but I am kissing and embracing it over and over again;" and so
saying he thrust it into Sancho's hands, who raising it aloft pointed
to his mouth, gazed at the stars for a quarter of an hour; and when he
had done drinking let his head fall on one side, and giving a deep
sigh, exclaimed, "Ah, whoreson rogue, how catholic it is!" "There, you
see," said he of the Grove, hearing Sancho's exclamation, "how you
have called this wine whoreson by way of praise." "Well," said Sancho,
"I own it, and I grant it is no dishonour to call anyone whoreson when
it is to be understood as praise. But tell me, senor, by what you love
best, is this Ciudad Real wine?" "O rare wine-taster!" said he of the
Grove; "nowhere else indeed does it come from, and it has some years'
age too." "Leave me alone for that," said Sancho; "never fear but I'll
hit upon the place it came from somehow. What would you say, sir
squire, to my having such a great natural instinct in judging wines
that you have only to let me smell one and I can tell positively its
country, its kind, its flavour and soundness, the changes it will
undergo, and everything that appertains to a wine? But it is no
wonder, for I have had in my family, on my father's side, the two best
wine-tasters that have been known in La Mancha for many a long year,
and to prove it I'll tell you now a thing that happened them. They
gave the two of them some wine out of a cask, to try, asking their
opinion as to the condition, quality, goodness or badness of the wine.
One of them tried it with the tip of his tongue, the other did no more
than bring it to his nose. The first said the wine had a flavour of
iron, the second said it had a stronger flavour of cordovan. The owner
said the cask was clean, and that nothing had been added to the wine
from which it could have got a flavour of either iron or leather.
Nevertheless, these two great wine-tasters held to what they had said.
Time went by, the wine was sold, and when they came to clean out the
cask, they found in it a small key hanging to a thong of cordovan; see
now if one who comes of the same stock has not a right to give his
opinion in such like cases." "Therefore, I say," said he of the Grove,
"let us give up going in quest of adventures, and as we have loaves
let us not go looking for cakes, but return to our cribs, for God will
find us there if it be his will." "Until my master reaches Saragossa,"
said Sancho, "I'll remain in his service; after that we'll see." The
end of it was that the two squires talked so much and drank so much
that sleep had to tie their tongues and moderate their thirst, for to
quench it was impossible; and so the pair of them fell asleep clinging
to the now nearly empty bota and with half-chewed morsels in their
mouths; and there we will leave them for the present, to relate what
passed between the Knight of the Grove and him of the Rueful
Countenance. CHAPTER XIV. WHEREIN IS CONTINUED THE ADVENTURE OF THE
KNIGHT OF THE GROVE CHAPTER XV WHEREIN IT IS TOLD AND KNOWN WHO THE
KNIGHT OF THE MIRRORS AND HIS SQUIRE WERE Don Quixote went off
satisfied, elated, and vain-glorious in the highest degree at having
won a victory over such a valiant knight as he fancied him of the
Mirrors to be, and one from whose knightly word he expected to learn
whether the enchantment of his lady still continued; inasmuch as the
said vanquished knight was bound, under the penalty of ceasing to be
one, to return and render him an account of what took place between
him and her. But Don Quixote was of one mind, he of the Mirrors of
another, for he just then had no thought of anything but finding some
village where he could plaster himself, as has been said already. The
history goes on to say, then, that when the bachelor Samson Carrasco
recommended Don Quixote to resume his knight-errantry which he had
laid aside, it was in consequence of having been previously in
conclave with the curate and the barber on the means to be adopted to
induce Don Quixote to stay at home in peace and quiet without worrying
himself with his ill-starred adventures; at which consultation it was
decided by the unanimous vote of all, and on the special advice of
Carrasco, that Don Quixote should be allowed to go, as it seemed
impossible to restrain him, and that Samson should sally forth to meet
him as a knight-errant, and do battle with him, for there would be no
difficulty about a cause, and vanquish him, that being looked upon as
an easy matter; and that it should be agreed and settled that the
vanquished was to be at the mercy of the victor. Then, Don Quixote
being vanquished, the bachelor knight was to command him to return to
his village and his house, and not quit it for two years, or until he
received further orders from him; all which it was clear Don Quixote
would unhesitatingly obey, rather than contravene or fail to observe
the laws of chivalry; and during the period of his seclusion he might
perhaps forget his folly, or there might be an opportunity of
discovering some ready remedy for his madness. Carrasco undertook the
task, and Tom Cecial, a gossip and neighbour of Sancho Panza's, a
lively, feather-headed fellow, offered himself as his squire. Carrasco
armed himself in the fashion described, and Tom Cecial, that he might
not be known by his gossip when they met, fitted on over his own
natural nose the false masquerade one that has been mentioned; and so
they followed the same route Don Quixote took, and almost came up with
him in time to be present at the adventure of the cart of Death and
finally encountered them in the grove, where all that the sagacious
reader has been reading about took place; and had it not been for the
millers, who plunged in and hoisted them both out, it would have been
Troy town with the pair of them. As soon as, more drenched than
thirsty, they were landed, Sancho went down on his knees and with
clasped hands and eyes raised to heaven, prayed a long and fervent
prayer to God to deliver him evermore from the rash projects and
attempts of his master. The fishermen, the owners of the boat, which
the mill-wheels had knocked to pieces, now came up, and seeing it
smashed they proceeded to strip Sancho and to demand payment for it
from Don Quixote; but he with great calmness, just as if nothing had
happened him, told the millers and fishermen that he would pay for the
bark most cheerfully, on condition that they delivered up to him, free
and unhurt, the person or persons that were in durance in that castle
of theirs. "What persons or what castle art thou talking of, madman?
Art thou for carrying off the people who come to grind corn in these
mills?" "That's enough," said Don Quixote to himself, "it would be
preaching in the desert to attempt by entreaties to induce this rabble
to do any virtuous action. In this adventure two mighty enchanters
must have encountered one another, and one frustrates what the other
attempts; one provided the bark for me, and the other upset me; God
help us, this world is all machinations and schemes at cross purposes
one with the other. I can do no more." And then turning towards the
mills he said aloud, "Friends, whoe'er ye be that are immured in that
prison, forgive me that, to my misfortune and yours, I cannot deliver
you from your misery; this adventure is doubtless reserved and
destined for some other knight." So saying he settled with the
fishermen, and paid fifty reals for the boat, which Sancho handed to
them very much against the grain, saying, "With a couple more bark
businesses like this we shall have sunk our whole capital." The
fishermen and the millers stood staring in amazement at the two
figures, so very different to all appearance from ordinary men, and
were wholly unable to make out the drift of the observations and
questions Don Quixote addressed to them; and coming to the conclusion
that they were madmen, they left them and betook themselves, the
millers to their mills, and the fishermen to their huts. Don Quixote
and Sancho returned to their beasts, and to their life of beasts, and
so ended the adventure of the enchanted bark. CHAPTER XXX. OF DON
QUIXOTE'S ADVENTURE WITH A FAIR HUNTRESS CHAPTER XXXI WHICH TREATS OF
MANY AND GREAT MATTERS CHAPTER XXXII OF THE REPLY DON QUIXOTE GAVE HIS
CENSURER, WITH OTHER INCIDENTS, GRAVE AND DROLL CHAPTER XXXIII OF THE
DELECTABLE DISCOURSE WHICH THE DUCHESS AND HER DAMSELS HELD WITH
SANCHO PANZA, WELL WORTH READING AND NOTING The history records that
Sancho did not sleep that afternoon, but in order to keep his word
came, before he had well done dinner, to visit the duchess, who,
finding enjoyment in listening to him, made him sit down beside her on
a low seat, though Sancho, out of pure good breeding, wanted not to
sit down; the duchess, however, told him he was to sit down as
governor and talk as squire, as in both respects he was worthy of even
the chair of the Cid Ruy Diaz the Campeador. Sancho shrugged his
shoulders, obeyed, and sat down, and all the duchess's damsels and
duennas gathered round him, waiting in profound silence to hear what
he would say. It was the duchess, however, who spoke first, saying:
"Now that we are alone, and that there is nobody here to overhear us,
I should be glad if the senor governor would relieve me of certain
doubts I have, rising out of the history of the great Don Quixote that
is now in print. One is: inasmuch as worthy Sancho never saw Dulcinea,
I mean the lady Dulcinea del Toboso, to have the vanquished your
worship sends or will send coming to her and going down on their knees
before her? Because may be when they came she'd be hackling flax or
threshing on the threshing floor, and they'd be ashamed to see her,
and she'd laugh, or resent the present." "I have before now told thee
many times, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "that thou art a mighty great
chatterer, and that with a blunt wit thou art always striving at
sharpness; but to show thee what a fool thou art and how rational I
am, I would have thee listen to a short story. Thou must know that a
certain widow, fair, young, independent, and rich, and above all free
and easy, fell in love with a sturdy strapping young lay-brother; his
superior came to know of it, and one day said to the worthy widow by
way of brotherly remonstrance, 'I am surprised, senora, and not
without good reason, that a woman of such high standing, so fair, and
so rich as you are, should have fallen in love with such a mean, low,
stupid fellow as So-and-so, when in this house there are so many
masters, graduates, and divinity students from among whom you might
choose as if they were a lot of pears, saying this one I'll take, that
I won't take;' but she replied to him with great sprightliness and
candour, 'My dear sir, you are very much mistaken, and your ideas are
very old-fashioned, if you think that I have made a bad choice in
So-and-so, fool as he seems; because for all I want with him he knows
as much and more philosophy than Aristotle.' In the same way, Sancho,
for all I want with Dulcinea del Toboso she is just as good as the
most exalted princess on earth. It is not to be supposed that all
those poets who sang the praises of ladies under the fancy names they
give them, had any such mistresses. Thinkest thou that the
Amarillises, the Phillises, the Sylvias, the Dianas, the Galateas, the
Filidas, and all the rest of them, that the books, the ballads, the
barber's shops, the theatres are full of, were really and truly ladies
of flesh and blood, and mistresses of those that glorify and have
glorified them? Nothing of the kind; they only invent them for the
most part to furnish a subject for their verses, and that they may
pass for lovers, or for men valiant enough to be so; and so it
suffices me to think and believe that the good Aldonza Lorenzo is fair
and virtuous; and as to her pedigree it is very little matter, for no
one will examine into it for the purpose of conferring any order upon
her, and I, for my part, reckon her the most exalted princess in the
world. For thou shouldst know, Sancho, if thou dost not know, that two
things alone beyond all others are incentives to love, and these are
great beauty and a good name, and these two things are to be found in
Dulcinea in the highest degree, for in beauty no one equals her and in
good name few approach her; and to put the whole thing in a nutshell,
I persuade myself that all I say is as I say, neither more nor less,
and I picture her in my imagination as I would have her to be, as well
in beauty as in condition; Helen approaches her not nor does Lucretia
come up to her, nor any other of the famous women of times past,
Greek, Barbarian, or Latin; and let each say what he will, for if in
this I am taken to task by the ignorant, I shall not be censured by
the critical." "I say that your worship is entirely right," said
Sancho, "and that I am an ass. But I know not how the name of ass came
into my mouth, for a rope is not to be mentioned in the house of him
who has been hanged; but now for the letter, and then, God be with
you, I am off." Don Quixote took out the note-book, and, retiring to
one side, very deliberately began to write the letter, and when he had
finished it he called to Sancho, saying he wished to read it to him,
so that he might commit it to memory, in case of losing it on the
road; for with evil fortune like his anything might be apprehended. To
which Sancho replied, "Write it two or three times there in the book
and give it to me, and I will carry it very carefully, because to
expect me to keep it in my memory is all nonsense, for I have such a
bad one that I often forget my own name; but for all that repeat it to
me, as I shall like to hear it, for surely it will run as if it was in
print." "Listen," said Don Quixote, "this is what it says: "DON
QUIXOTE'S LETTER TO DULCINEA DEL TOBOSO "Sovereign and exalted
Lady,--The pierced by the point of absence, the wounded to the heart's
core, sends thee, sweetest Dulcinea del Toboso, the health that he
himself enjoys not. If thy beauty despises me, if thy worth is not for
me, if thy scorn is my affliction, though I be sufficiently
long-suffering, hardly shall I endure this anxiety, which, besides
being oppressive, is protracted. My good squire Sancho will relate to
thee in full, fair ingrate, dear enemy, the condition to which I am
reduced on thy account: if it be thy pleasure to give me relief, I am
thine; if not, do as may be pleasing to thee; for by ending my life I
shall satisfy thy cruelty and my desire. "Thine till death, "The
Knight of the Rueful Countenance." "By the life of my father," said
Sancho, when he heard the letter, "it is the loftiest thing I ever
heard. Body of me! how your worship says everything as you like in it!
And how well you fit in 'The Knight of the Rueful Countenance' into
the signature. I declare your worship is indeed the very devil, and
there is nothing you don't know." "Everything is needed for the
calling I follow," said Don Quixote. "Now then," said Sancho, "let
your worship put the order for the three ass-colts on the other side,
and sign it very plainly, that they may recognise it at first sight."
"With all my heart," said Don Quixote, and as he had written it he
read it to this effect: "Mistress Niece,--By this first of ass-colts
please pay to Sancho Panza, my squire, three of the five I left at
home in your charge: said three ass-colts to be paid and delivered for
the same number received here in hand, which upon this and upon his
receipt shall be duly paid. Done in the heart of the Sierra Morena,
the twenty-seventh of August of this present year." "That will do,"
said Sancho; "now let your worship sign it." "There is no need to sign
it," said Don Quixote, "but merely to put my flourish, which is the
same as a signature, and enough for three asses, or even three
hundred." "I can trust your worship," returned Sancho; "let me go and
saddle Rocinante, and be ready to give me your blessing, for I mean to
go at once without seeing the fooleries your worship is going to do;
I'll say I saw you do so many that she will not want any more." "At
any rate, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "I should like--and there is
reason for it--I should like thee, I say, to see me stripped to the
skin and performing a dozen or two of insanities, which I can get done
in less than half an hour; for having seen them with thine own eyes,
thou canst then safely swear to the rest that thou wouldst add; and I
promise thee thou wilt not tell of as many as I mean to perform." "For
the love of God, master mine," said Sancho, "let me not see your
worship stripped, for it will sorely grieve me, and I shall not be
able to keep from tears, and my head aches so with all I shed last
night for Dapple, that I am not fit to begin any fresh weeping; but if
it is your worship's pleasure that I should see some insanities, do
them in your clothes, short ones, and such as come readiest to hand;
for I myself want nothing of the sort, and, as I have said, it will be
a saving of time for my return, which will be with the news your
worship desires and deserves. If not, let the lady Dulcinea look to
it; if she does not answer reasonably, I swear as solemnly as I can
that I will fetch a fair answer out of her stomach with kicks and
cuffs; for why should it be borne that a knight-errant as famous as
your worship should go mad without rhyme or reason for a--? Her
ladyship had best not drive me to say it, for by God I will speak out
and let off everything cheap, even if it doesn't sell: I am pretty
good at that! she little knows me; faith, if she knew me she'd be in
awe of me." "In faith, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "to all appearance
thou art no sounder in thy wits than I." "I am not so mad," answered
Sancho, "but I am more peppery; but apart from all this, what has your
worship to eat until I come back? Will you sally out on the road like
Cardenio to force it from the shepherds?" "Let not that anxiety
trouble thee," replied Don Quixote, "for even if I had it I should not
eat anything but the herbs and the fruits which this meadow and these
trees may yield me; the beauty of this business of mine lies in not
eating, and in performing other mortifications." "Do you know what I
am afraid of?" said Sancho upon this; "that I shall not be able to
find my way back to this spot where I am leaving you, it is such an
out-of-the-way place." "Observe the landmarks well," said Don Quixote,
"for I will try not to go far from this neighbourhood, and I will even
take care to mount the highest of these rocks to see if I can discover
thee returning; however, not to miss me and lose thyself, the best
plan will be to cut some branches of the broom that is so abundant
about here, and as thou goest to lay them at intervals until thou hast
come out upon the plain; these will serve thee, after the fashion of
the clue in the labyrinth of Theseus, as marks and signs for finding
me on thy return." "So I will," said Sancho Panza, and having cut
some, he asked his master's blessing, and not without many tears on
both sides, took his leave of him, and mounting Rocinante, of whom Don
Quixote charged him earnestly to have as much care as of his own
person, he set out for the plain, strewing at intervals the branches
of broom as his master had recommended him; and so he went his way,
though Don Quixote still entreated him to see him do were it only a
couple of mad acts. He had not gone a hundred paces, however, when he
returned and said: "I must say, senor, your worship said quite right,
that in order to be able to swear without a weight on my conscience
that I had seen you do mad things, it would be well for me to see if
it were only one; though in your worship's remaining here I have seen
a very great one." "Did I not tell thee so?" said Don Quixote. "Wait,
Sancho, and I will do them in the saying of a credo," and pulling off
his breeches in all haste he stripped himself to his skin and his
shirt, and then, without more ado, he cut a couple of gambados in the
air, and a couple of somersaults, heels over head, making such a
display that, not to see it a second time, Sancho wheeled Rocinante
round, and felt easy, and satisfied in his mind that he could swear he
had left his master mad; and so we will leave him to follow his road
until his return, which was a quick one. CHAPTER XXVI. IN WHICH ARE
CONTINUED THE REFINEMENTS WHEREWITH DON QUIXOTE PLAYED THE PART OF A
LOVER IN THE SIERRA MORENA Returning to the proceedings of him of the
Rueful Countenance when he found himself alone, the history says that
when Don Quixote had completed the performance of the somersaults or
capers, naked from the waist down and clothed from the waist up, and
saw that Sancho had gone off without waiting to see any more crazy
feats, he climbed up to the top of a high rock, and there set himself
to consider what he had several times before considered without ever
coming to any conclusion on the point, namely whether it would be
better and more to his purpose to imitate the outrageous madness of
Roland, or the melancholy madness of Amadis; and communing with
himself he said: "What wonder is it if Roland was so good a knight and
so valiant as everyone says he was, when, after all, he was enchanted,
and nobody could kill him save by thrusting a corking pin into the
sole of his foot, and he always wore shoes with seven iron soles?
Though cunning devices did not avail him against Bernardo del Carpio,
who knew all about them, and strangled him in his arms at
Roncesvalles. But putting the question of his valour aside, let us
come to his losing his wits, for certain it is that he did lose them
in consequence of the proofs he discovered at the fountain, and the
intelligence the shepherd gave him of Angelica having slept more than
two siestas with Medoro, a little curly-headed Moor, and page to
Agramante. If he was persuaded that this was true, and that his lady
had wronged him, it is no wonder that he should have gone mad; but I,
how am I to imitate him in his madness, unless I can imitate him in
the cause of it? For my Dulcinea, I will venture to swear, never saw a
Moor in her life, as he is, in his proper costume, and she is this day
as the mother that bore her, and I should plainly be doing her a wrong
if, fancying anything else, I were to go mad with the same kind of
madness as Roland the Furious. On the other hand, I see that Amadis of
Gaul, without losing his senses and without doing anything mad,
acquired as a lover as much fame as the most famous; for, according to
his history, on finding himself rejected by his lady Oriana, who had
ordered him not to appear in her presence until it should be her
pleasure, all he did was to retire to the Pena Pobre in company with a
hermit, and there he took his fill of weeping until Heaven sent him
relief in the midst of his great grief and need. And if this be true,
as it is, why should I now take the trouble to strip stark naked, or
do mischief to these trees which have done me no harm, or why am I to
disturb the clear waters of these brooks which will give me to drink
whenever I have a mind? Long live the memory of Amadis and let him be
imitated so far as is possible by Don Quixote of La Mancha, of whom it
will be said, as was said of the other, that if he did not achieve
great things, he died in attempting them; and if I am not repulsed or
rejected by my Dulcinea, it is enough for me, as I have said, to be
absent from her. And so, now to business; come to my memory ye deeds
of Amadis, and show me how I am to begin to imitate you. I know
already that what he chiefly did was to pray and commend himself to
God; but what am I to do for a rosary, for I have not got one?" And
then it occurred to him how he might make one, and that was by tearing
a great strip off the tail of his shirt which hung down, and making
eleven knots on it, one bigger than the rest, and this served him for
a rosary all the time he was there, during which he repeated countless
ave-marias. But what distressed him greatly was not having another
hermit there to confess him and receive consolation from; and so he
solaced himself with pacing up and down the little meadow, and writing
and carving on the bark of the trees and on the fine sand a multitude
of verses all in harmony with his sadness, and some in praise of
Dulcinea; but, when he was found there afterwards, the only ones
completely legible that could be discovered were those that follow
here: Ye on the mountain side that grow, Ye green things all, trees,
shrubs, and bushes, Are ye aweary of the woe That this poor aching
bosom crushes? If it disturb you, and I owe Some reparation, it may be
a Defence for me to let you know Don Quixote's tears are on the flow,
And all for distant Dulcinea Del Toboso. The lealest lover time can
show, Doomed for a lady-love to languish, Among these solitudes doth
go, A prey to every kind of anguish. Why Love should like a spiteful
foe Thus use him, he hath no idea, But hogsheads full--this doth he
know-- Don Quixote's tears are on the flow, And all for distant
Dulcinea Del Toboso. The addition of "Del Toboso" to Dulcinea's name
gave rise to no little laughter among those who found the above lines,
for they suspected Don Quixote must have fancied that unless he added
"del Toboso" when he introduced the name of Dulcinea the verse would
be unintelligible; which was indeed the fact, as he himself afterwards
admitted. He wrote many more, but, as has been said, these three
verses were all that could be plainly and perfectly deciphered. In
this way, and in sighing and calling on the fauns and satyrs of the
woods and the nymphs of the streams, and Echo, moist and mournful, to
answer, console, and hear him, as well as in looking for herbs to
sustain him, he passed his time until Sancho's return; and had that
been delayed three weeks, as it was three days, the Knight of the
Rueful Countenance would have worn such an altered countenance that
the mother that bore him would not have known him; lean, yellow, with
his eyes sunk deep in the cells of his skull; so that to bring him
round again, ever so little, cost me more than six hundred eggs, as
God knows, and all the world, and my hens too, that won't let me tell
a lie." "That I can well believe," replied the bachelor, "for they are
so good and so fat, and so well-bred, that they would not say one
thing for another, though they were to burst for it. In short then,
mistress housekeeper, that is all, and there is nothing the matter,
except what it is feared Don Quixote may do?" "No, senor," said she.
"Well then," returned the bachelor, "don't be uneasy, but go home in
peace; get me ready something hot for breakfast, and while you are on
the way say the prayer of Santa Apollonia, that is if you know it; for
I will come presently and you will see miracles." "Woe is me," cried
the housekeeper, "is it the prayer of Santa Apollonia you would have
me say? That would do if it was the toothache my master had; but it is
in the brains, what he has got." "I know what I am saying, mistress
housekeeper; go, and don't set yourself to argue with me, for you know
I am a bachelor of Salamanca, and one can't be more of a bachelor than
that," replied Carrasco; and with this the housekeeper retired, and
the bachelor went to look for the curate, and arrange with him what
will be told in its proper place. While Don Quixote and Sancho were
shut up together, they had a discussion which the history records with
great precision and scrupulous exactness. Sancho said to his master,
"Senor, I have educed my wife to let me go with your worship wherever
you choose to take me." "Induced, you should say, Sancho," said Don
Quixote; "not educed." "Once or twice, as well as I remember," replied
Sancho, "I have begged of your worship not to mend my words, if so be
as you understand what I mean by them; and if you don't understand
them to say 'Sancho,' or 'devil,' 'I don't understand thee; and if I
don't make my meaning plain, then you may correct me, for I am so
focile-" "I don't understand thee, Sancho," said Don Quixote at once;
"for I know not what 'I am so focile' means." "'So focile' means I am
so much that way," replied Sancho. "I understand thee still less now,"
said Don Quixote. "Well, if you can't understand me," said Sancho, "I
don't know how to put it; I know no more, God help me." "Oh, now I
have hit it," said Don Quixote; "thou wouldst say thou art so docile,
tractable, and gentle that thou wilt take what I say to thee, and
submit to what I teach thee." "I would bet," said Sancho, "that from
the very first you understood me, and knew what I meant, but you
wanted to put me out that you might hear me make another couple of
dozen blunders." "May be so," replied Don Quixote; "but to come to the
point, what does Teresa say?" "Teresa says," replied Sancho, "that I
should make sure with your worship, and 'let papers speak and beards
be still,' for 'he who binds does not wrangle,' since one 'take' is
better than two 'I'll give thee's;' and I say a woman's advice is no
great thing, and he who won't take it is a fool." "And so say I," said
Don Quixote; "continue, Sancho my friend; go on; you talk pearls
to-day." "The fact is," continued Sancho, "that, as your worship knows
better than I do, we are all of us liable to death, and to-day we are,
and to-morrow we are not, and the lamb goes as soon as the sheep, and
nobody can promise himself more hours of life in this world than God
may be pleased to give him; for death is deaf, and when it comes to
knock at our life's door, it is always urgent, and neither prayers,
nor struggles, nor sceptres, nor mitres, can keep it back, as common
talk and report say, and as they tell us from the pulpits every day."
"All that is very true," said Don Quixote; "but I cannot make out what
thou art driving at." "What I am driving at," said Sancho, "is that
your worship settle some fixed wages for me, to be paid monthly while
I am in your service, and that the same he paid me out of your estate;
for I don't care to stand on rewards which either come late, or ill,
or never at all; God help me with my own. In short, I would like to
know what I am to get, be it much or little; for the hen will lay on
one egg, and many littles make a much, and so long as one gains
something there is nothing lost. To be sure, if it should happen (what
I neither believe nor expect) that your worship were to give me that
island you have promised me, I am not so ungrateful nor so grasping
but that I would be willing to have the revenue of such island valued
and stopped out of my wages in due promotion." "Sancho, my friend,"
replied Don Quixote, "sometimes proportion may be as good as
promotion." "I see," said Sancho; "I'll bet I ought to have said
proportion, and not promotion; but it is no matter, as your worship
has understood me." "And so well understood," returned Don Quixote,
"that I have seen into the depths of thy thoughts, and know the mark
thou art shooting at with the countless shafts of thy proverbs. Look
here, Sancho, I would readily fix thy wages if I had ever found any
instance in the histories of the knights-errant to show or indicate,
by the slightest hint, what their squires used to get monthly or
yearly; but I have read all or the best part of their histories, and I
cannot remember reading of any knight-errant having assigned fixed
wages to his squire; I only know that they all served on reward, and
that when they least expected it, if good luck attended their masters,
they found themselves recompensed with an island or something
equivalent to it, or at the least they were left with a title and
lordship. If with these hopes and additional inducements you, Sancho,
please to return to my service, well and good; but to suppose that I
am going to travel on foot, and make long ones, is to suppose
nonsense." "Thou sayest well, Sancho," said Don Quixote; "let my
armour be hung up for a trophy, and under it or round it we will carve
on the trees what was inscribed on the trophy of Roland's armour--
These let none move Who dareth not his might with Roland prove.'"
"Although mine is of the Cachopins of Laredo," said the traveller, "I
will not venture to compare it with that of El Toboso of La Mancha,
though, to tell the truth, no such surname has until now ever reached
my ears." "What!" said Don Quixote, "has that never reached them?" The
rest of the party went along listening with great attention to the
conversation of the pair, and even the very goatherds and shepherds
perceived how exceedingly out of his wits our Don Quixote was. Sancho
Panza alone thought that what his master said was the truth, knowing
who he was and having known him from his birth; and all that he felt
any difficulty in believing was that about the fair Dulcinea del
Toboso, because neither any such name nor any such princess had ever
come to his knowledge though he lived so close to El Toboso. They were
going along conversing in this way, when they saw descending a gap
between two high mountains some twenty shepherds, all clad in
sheepskins of black wool, and crowned with garlands which, as
afterwards appeared, were, some of them of yew, some of cypress. Six
of the number were carrying a bier covered with a great variety of
flowers and branches, on seeing which one of the goatherds said,
"Those who come there are the bearers of Chrysostom's body, and the
foot of that mountain is the place where he ordered them to bury him."
They therefore made haste to reach the spot, and did so by the time
those who came had laid the bier upon the ground, and four of them
with sharp pickaxes were digging a grave by the side of a hard rock.
They greeted each other courteously, and then Don Quixote and those
who accompanied him turned to examine the bier, and on it, covered
with flowers, they saw a dead body in the dress of a shepherd, to all
appearance of one thirty years of age, and showing even in death that
in life he had been of comely features and gallant bearing. Around him
on the bier itself were laid some books, and several papers open and
folded; and those who were looking on as well as those who were
opening the grave and all the others who were there preserved a
strange silence, until one of those who had borne the body said to
another, "Observe carefully, Ambrosia if this is the place Chrysostom
spoke of, since you are anxious that what he directed in his will
should be so strictly complied with." "This is the place," answered
Ambrosia "for in it many a time did my poor friend tell me the story
of his hard fortune. Here it was, he told me, that he saw for the
first time that mortal enemy of the human race, and here, too, for the
first time he declared to her his passion, as honourable as it was
devoted, and here it was that at last Marcela ended by scorning and
rejecting him so as to bring the tragedy of his wretched life to a
close; here, in memory of misfortunes so great, he desired to be laid
in the bowels of eternal oblivion." Then turning to Don Quixote and
the travellers he went on to say, "That body, sirs, on which you are
looking with compassionate eyes, was the abode of a soul on which
Heaven bestowed a vast share of its riches. That is the body of
Chrysostom, who was unrivalled in wit, unequalled in courtesy,
unapproached in gentle bearing, a phoenix in friendship, generous
without limit, grave without arrogance, gay without vulgarity, and, in
short, first in all that constitutes goodness and second to none in
all that makes up misfortune. He loved deeply, he was hated; he
adored, he was scorned; he wooed a wild beast, he pleaded with marble,
he pursued the wind, he cried to the wilderness, he served
ingratitude, and for reward was made the prey of death in the
mid-course of life, cut short by a shepherdess whom he sought to
immortalise in the memory of man, as these papers which you see could
fully prove, had he not commanded me to consign them to the fire after
having consigned his body to the earth." "You would deal with them
more harshly and cruelly than their owner himself," said Vivaldo, "for
it is neither right nor proper to do the will of one who enjoins what
is wholly unreasonable; it would not have been reasonable in Augustus
Caesar had he permitted the directions left by the divine Mantuan in
his will to be carried into effect. So that, Senor Ambrosia while you
consign your friend's body to the earth, you should not consign his
writings to oblivion, for if he gave the order in bitterness of heart,
it is not right that you should irrationally obey it. On the contrary,
by granting life to those papers, let the cruelty of Marcela live for
ever, to serve as a warning in ages to come to all men to shun and
avoid falling into like danger; or I and all of us who have come here
know already the story of this your love-stricken and heart-broken
friend, and we know, too, your friendship, and the cause of his death,
and the directions he gave at the close of his life; from which sad
story may be gathered how great was the cruelty of Marcela, the love
of Chrysostom, and the loyalty of your friendship, together with the
end awaiting those who pursue rashly the path that insane passion
opens to their eyes. Last night we learned the death of Chrysostom and
that he was to be buried here, and out of curiosity and pity we left
our direct road and resolved to come and see with our eyes that which
when heard of had so moved our compassion, and in consideration of
that compassion and our desire to prove it if we might by condolence,
we beg of you, excellent Ambrosia, or at least I on my own account
entreat you, that instead of burning those papers you allow me to
carry away some of them." And without waiting for the shepherd's
answer, he stretched out his hand and took up some of those that were
nearest to him; seeing which Ambrosio said, "Out of courtesy, senor, I
will grant your request as to those you have taken, but it is idle to
expect me to abstain from burning the remainder." Vivaldo, who was
eager to see what the papers contained, opened one of them at once,
and saw that its title was "Lay of Despair." Ambrosio hearing it said,
"That is the last paper the unhappy man wrote; and that you may see,
senor, to what an end his misfortunes brought him, read it so that you
may be heard, for you will have time enough for that while we are
waiting for the grave to be dug." "I will do so very willingly," said
Vivaldo; and as all the bystanders were equally eager they gathered
round him, and he, reading in a loud voice, found that it ran as
follows. CHAPTER XIV. WHEREIN ARE INSERTED THE DESPAIRING VERSES OF
THE DEAD SHEPHERD, TOGETHER WITH OTHER INCIDENTS NOT LOOKED FOR THE
LAY OF CHRYSOSTOM Since thou dost in thy cruelty desire The ruthless
rigour of thy tyranny From tongue to tongue, from land to land
proclaimed, The very Hell will I constrain to lend This stricken
breast of mine deep notes of woe To serve my need of fitting
utterance. And as I strive to body forth the tale Of all I suffer, all
that thou hast done, Forth shall the dread voice roll, and bear along
Shreds from my vitals torn for greater pain. Then listen, not to
dulcet harmony, But to a discord wrung by mad despair Out of this
bosom's depths of bitterness, To ease my heart and plant a sting in
thine. The lion's roar, the fierce wolf's savage howl, The horrid
hissing of the scaly snake, The awesome cries of monsters yet unnamed,
The crow's ill-boding croak, the hollow moan Of wild winds wrestling
with the restless sea, The wrathful bellow of the vanquished bull, The
plaintive sobbing of the widowed dove, The envied owl's sad note, the
wail of woe That rises from the dreary choir of Hell, Commingled in
one sound, confusing sense, Let all these come to aid my soul's
complaint, For pain like mine demands new modes of song. No echoes of
that discord shall be heard Where Father Tagus rolls, or on the banks
Of olive-bordered Betis; to the rocks Or in deep caverns shall my
plaint be told, And by a lifeless tongue in living words; Or in dark
valleys or on lonely shores, Where neither foot of man nor sunbeam
falls; Or in among the poison-breathing swarms Of monsters nourished
by the sluggish Nile. For, though it be to solitudes remote The hoarse
vague echoes of my sorrows sound Thy matchless cruelty, my dismal fate
Shall carry them to all the spacious world. Disdain hath power to
kill, and patience dies Slain by suspicion, be it false or true; And
deadly is the force of jealousy; Long absence makes of life a dreary
void; No hope of happiness can give repose To him that ever fears to
be forgot; And death, inevitable, waits in hall. But I, by some
strange miracle, live on A prey to absence, jealousy, disdain; Racked
by suspicion as by certainty; Forgotten, left to feed my flame alone.
And while I suffer thus, there comes no ray Of hope to gladden me
athwart the gloom; Nor do I look for it in my despair; But rather
clinging to a cureless woe, All hope do I abjure for evermore. Can
there be hope where fear is? Were it well, When far more certain are
the grounds of fear? Ought I to shut mine eyes to jealousy, If through
a thousand heart-wounds it appears? Who would not give free access to
distrust, Seeing disdain unveiled, and--bitter change!-- All his
suspicions turned to certainties, And the fair truth transformed into
a lie? Oh, thou fierce tyrant of the realms of love, Oh, Jealousy! put
chains upon these hands, And bind me with thy strongest cord, Disdain.
But, woe is me! triumphant over all, My sufferings drown the memory of
you. And now I die, and since there is no hope Of happiness for me in
life or death, Still to my fantasy I'll fondly cling. I'll say that he
is wise who loveth well, And that the soul most free is that most
bound In thraldom to the ancient tyrant Love. I'll say that she who is
mine enemy In that fair body hath as fair a mind, And that her
coldness is but my desert, And that by virtue of the pain he sends
Love rules his kingdom with a gentle sway. Thus, self-deluding, and in
bondage sore, And wearing out the wretched shred of life To which I am
reduced by her disdain, I'll give this soul and body to the winds, All
hopeless of a crown of bliss in store. Thou whose injustice hath
supplied the cause That makes me quit the weary life I loathe, As by
this wounded bosom thou canst see How willingly thy victim I become,
Let not my death, if haply worth a tear, Cloud the clear heaven that
dwells in thy bright eyes; I would not have thee expiate in aught The
crime of having made my heart thy prey; But rather let thy laughter
gaily ring And prove my death to be thy festival. Fool that I am to
bid thee! well I know Thy glory gains by my untimely end. And now it
is the time; from Hell's abyss Come thirsting Tantalus, come Sisyphus
Heaving the cruel stone, come Tityus With vulture, and with wheel
Ixion come, And come the sisters of the ceaseless toil; And all into
this breast transfer their pains, And (if such tribute to despair be
due) Chant in their deepest tones a doleful dirge Over a corse
unworthy of a shroud. Let the three-headed guardian of the gate, And
all the monstrous progeny of hell, The doleful concert join: a lover
dead Methinks can have no fitter obsequies. Lay of despair, grieve not
when thou art gone Forth from this sorrowing heart: my misery Brings
fortune to the cause that gave thee birth; Then banish sadness even in
the tomb. The "Lay of Chrysostom" met with the approbation of the
listeners, though the reader said it did not seem to him to agree with
what he had heard of Marcela's reserve and propriety, for Chrysostom
complained in it of jealousy, suspicion, and absence, all to the
prejudice of the good name and fame of Marcela; to which Ambrosio
replied as one who knew well his friend's most secret thoughts,
"Senor, to remove that doubt I should tell you that when the unhappy
man wrote this lay he was away from Marcela, from whom he had
voluntarily separated himself, to try if absence would act with him as
it is wont; and as everything distresses and every fear haunts the
banished lover, so imaginary jealousies and suspicions, dreaded as if
they were true, tormented Chrysostom; and thus the truth of what
report declares of the virtue of Marcela remains unshaken, and with
her envy itself should not and cannot find any fault save that of
being cruel, somewhat haughty, and very scornful." "That is true,"
said Vivaldo; and as he was about to read another paper of those he
had preserved from the fire, he was stopped by a marvellous vision
(for such it seemed) that unexpectedly presented itself to their eyes;
for on the summit of the rock where they were digging the grave there
appeared the shepherdess Marcela, so beautiful that her beauty
exceeded its reputation. Those who had never till then beheld her
gazed upon her in wonder and silence, and those who were accustomed to
see her were not less amazed than those who had never seen her before.
But the instant Ambrosio saw her he addressed her, with manifest
indignation: "Art thou come, by chance, cruel basilisk of these
mountains, to see if in thy presence blood will flow from the wounds
of this wretched being thy cruelty has robbed of life; or is it to
exult over the cruel work of thy humours that thou art come; or like
another pitiless Nero to look down from that height upon the ruin of
his Rome in embers; or in thy arrogance to trample on this ill-fated
corpse, as the ungrateful daughter trampled on her father Tarquin's?
Tell us quickly for what thou art come, or what it is thou wouldst
have, for, as I know the thoughts of Chrysostom never failed to obey
thee in life, I will make all these who call themselves his friends
obey thee, though he be dead." "I come not, Ambrosia for any of the
purposes thou hast named," replied Marcela, "but to defend myself and
to prove how unreasonable are all those who blame me for their sorrow
and for Chrysostom's death; and therefore I ask all of you that are
here to give me your attention, for will not take much time or many
words to bring the truth home to persons of sense. Heaven has made me,
so you say, beautiful, and so much so that in spite of yourselves my
beauty leads you to love me; and for the love you show me you say, and
even urge, that I am bound to love you. By that natural understanding
which God has given me I know that everything beautiful attracts love,
but I cannot see how, by reason of being loved, that which is loved
for its beauty is bound to love that which loves it; besides, it may
happen that the lover of that which is beautiful may be ugly, and
ugliness being detestable, it is very absurd to say, "I love thee
because thou art beautiful, thou must love me though I be ugly." But
supposing the beauty equal on both sides, it does not follow that the
inclinations must be therefore alike, for it is not every beauty that
excites love, some but pleasing the eye without winning the affection;
and if every sort of beauty excited love and won the heart, the will
would wander vaguely to and fro unable to make choice of any; for as
there is an infinity of beautiful objects there must be an infinity of
inclinations, and true love, I have heard it said, is indivisible, and
must be voluntary and not compelled. If this be so, as I believe it to
be, why do you desire me to bend my will by force, for no other reason
but that you say you love me? Nay--tell me--had Heaven made me ugly,
as it has made me beautiful, could I with justice complain of you for
not loving me? Moreover, you must remember that the beauty I possess
was no choice of mine, for, be it what it may, Heaven of its bounty
gave it me without my asking or choosing it; and as the viper, though
it kills with it, does not deserve to be blamed for the poison it
carries, as it is a gift of nature, neither do I deserve reproach for
being beautiful; for beauty in a modest woman is like fire at a
distance or a sharp sword; the one does not burn, the other does not
cut, those who do not come too near. Honour and virtue are the
ornaments of the mind, without which the body, though it be so, has no
right to pass for beautiful; but if modesty is one of the virtues that
specially lend a grace and charm to mind and body, why should she who
is loved for her beauty part with it to gratify one who for his
pleasure alone strives with all his might and energy to rob her of it?
I was born free, and that I might live in freedom I chose the solitude
of the fields; in the trees of the mountains I find society, the clear
waters of the brooks are my mirrors, and to the trees and waters I
make known my thoughts and charms. I am a fire afar off, a sword laid
aside. Those whom I have inspired with love by letting them see me, I
have by words undeceived, and if their longings live on hope--and I
have given none to Chrysostom or to any other--it cannot justly be
said that the death of any is my doing, for it was rather his own
obstinacy than my cruelty that killed him; and if it be made a charge
against me that his wishes were honourable, and that therefore I was
bound to yield to them, I answer that when on this very spot where now
his grave is made he declared to me his purity of purpose, I told him
that mine was to live in perpetual solitude, and that the earth alone
should enjoy the fruits of my retirement and the spoils of my beauty;
and if, after this open avowal, he chose to persist against hope and
steer against the wind, what wonder is it that he should sink in the
depths of his infatuation? If I had encouraged him, I should be false;
if I had gratified him, I should have acted against my own better
resolution and purpose. He was persistent in spite of warning, he
despaired without being hated. Bethink you now if it be reasonable
that his suffering should be laid to my charge. Let him who has been
deceived complain, let him give way to despair whose encouraged hopes
have proved vain, let him flatter himself whom I shall entice, let him
boast whom I shall receive; but let not him call me cruel or homicide
to whom I make no promise, upon whom I practise no deception, whom I
neither entice nor receive. It has not been so far the will of Heaven
that I should love by fate, and to expect me to love by choice is
idle. Let this general declaration serve for each of my suitors on his
own account, and let it be understood from this time forth that if
anyone dies for me it is not of jealousy or misery he dies, for she
who loves no one can give no cause for jealousy to any, and candour is
not to be confounded with scorn. Let him who calls me wild beast and
basilisk, leave me alone as something noxious and evil; let him who
calls me ungrateful, withhold his service; who calls me wayward, seek
not my acquaintance; who calls me cruel, pursue me not; for this wild
beast, this basilisk, this ungrateful, cruel, wayward being has no
kind of desire to seek, serve, know, or follow them. If Chrysostom's
impatience and violent passion killed him, why should my modest
behaviour and circumspection be blamed? If I preserve my purity in the
society of the trees, why should he who would have me preserve it
among men, seek to rob me of it? I have, as you know, wealth of my
own, and I covet not that of others; my taste is for freedom, and I
have no relish for constraint; I neither love nor hate anyone; I do
not deceive this one or court that, or trifle with one or play with
another. The modest converse of the shepherd girls of these hamlets
and the care of my goats are my recreations; my desires are bounded by
these mountains, and if they ever wander hence it is to contemplate
the beauty of the heavens, steps by which the soul travels to its
primeval abode." With these words, and not waiting to hear a reply,
she turned and passed into the thickest part of a wood that was hard
by, leaving all who were there lost in admiration as much of her good
sense as of her beauty. Some--those wounded by the irresistible shafts
launched by her bright eyes--made as though they would follow her,
heedless of the frank declaration they had heard; seeing which, and
deeming this a fitting occasion for the exercise of his chivalry in
aid of distressed damsels, Don Quixote, laying his hand on the hilt of
his sword, exclaimed in a loud and distinct voice: "Let no one,
whatever his rank or condition, dare to follow the beautiful Marcela,
under pain of incurring my fierce indignation. She has shown by clear
and satisfactory arguments that little or no fault is to be found with
her for the death of Chrysostom, and also how far she is from yielding
to the wishes of any of her lovers, for which reason, instead of being
followed and persecuted, she should in justice be honoured and
esteemed by all the good people of the world, for she shows that she
is the only woman in it that holds to such a virtuous resolution."
Whether it was because of the threats of Don Quixote, or because
Ambrosio told them to fulfil their duty to their good friend, none of
the shepherds moved or stirred from the spot until, having finished
the grave and burned Chrysostom's papers, they laid his body in it,
not without many tears from those who stood by. They closed the grave
with a heavy stone until a slab was ready which Ambrosio said he meant
to have prepared, with an epitaph which was to be to this effect:
Beneath the stone before your eyes The body of a lover lies; In life
he was a shepherd swain, In death a victim to disdain. Ungrateful,
cruel, coy, and fair, Was she that drove him to despair, And Love hath
made her his ally For spreading wide his tyranny. They then strewed
upon the grave a profusion of flowers and branches, and all expressing
their condolence with his friend ambrosio, took their Vivaldo and his
companion did the same; and Don Quixote bade farewell to his hosts and
to the travellers, who pressed him to come with them to Seville, as
being such a convenient place for finding adventures, for they
presented themselves in every street and round every corner oftener
than anywhere else. Don Quixote thanked them for their advice and for
the disposition they showed to do him a favour, and said that for the
present he would not, and must not go to Seville until he had cleared
all these mountains of highwaymen and robbers, of whom report said
they were full. Seeing his good intention, the travellers were
unwilling to press him further, and once more bidding him farewell,
they left him and pursued their journey, in the course of which they
did not fail to discuss the story of Marcela and Chrysostom as well as
the madness of Don Quixote. He, on his part, resolved to go in quest
of the shepherdess Marcela, and make offer to her of all the service
he could render her; but things did not fall out with him as he
expected, according to what is related in the course of this veracious
history, of which the Second Part ends here. CHAPTER XV. IN WHICH IS
RELATED THE UNFORTUNATE ADVENTURE THAT DON QUIXOTE FELL IN WITH WHEN
HE FELL OUT WITH CERTAIN HEARTLESS YANGUESANS The sage Cide Hamete
Benengeli relates that as soon as Don Quixote took leave of his hosts
and all who had been present at the burial of Chrysostom, he and his
squire passed into the same wood which they had seen the shepherdess
Marcela enter, and after having wandered for more than two hours in
all directions in search of her without finding her, they came to a
halt in a glade covered with tender grass, beside which ran a pleasant
cool stream that invited and compelled them to pass there the hours of
the noontide heat, which by this time was beginning to come on
oppressively. Don Quixote and Sancho dismounted, and turning Rocinante
and the ass loose to feed on the grass that was there in abundance,
they ransacked the alforjas, and without any ceremony very peacefully
and sociably master and man made their repast on what they found in
them. Sancho had not thought it worth while to hobble Rocinante,
feeling sure, from what he knew of his staidness and freedom from
incontinence, that all the mares in the Cordova pastures would not
lead him into an impropriety. Chance, however, and the devil, who is
not always asleep, so ordained it that feeding in this valley there
was a drove of Galician ponies belonging to certain Yanguesan
carriers, whose way it is to take their midday rest with their teams
in places and spots where grass and water abound; and that where Don
Quixote chanced to be suited the Yanguesans' purpose very well. It so
happened, then, that Rocinante took a fancy to disport himself with
their ladyships the ponies, and abandoning his usual gait and
demeanour as he scented them, he, without asking leave of his master,
got up a briskish little trot and hastened to make known his wishes to
them; they, however, it seemed, preferred their pasture to him, and
received him with their heels and teeth to such effect that they soon
broke his girths and left him naked without a saddle to cover him; but
what must have been worse to him was that the carriers, seeing the
violence he was offering to their mares, came running up armed with
stakes, and so belaboured him that they brought him sorely battered to
the ground. By this time Don Quixote and Sancho, who had witnessed the
drubbing of Rocinante, came up panting, and said Don Quixote to
Sancho: "So far as I can see, friend Sancho, these are not knights but
base folk of low birth: I mention it because thou canst lawfully aid
me in taking due vengeance for the insult offered to Rocinante before
our eyes." "What the devil vengeance can we take," answered Sancho,
"if they are more than twenty, and we no more than two, or, indeed,
perhaps not more than one and a half?" "I count for a hundred,"
replied Don Quixote, and without more words he drew his sword and
attacked the Yanguesans and excited and impelled by the example of his
master, Sancho did the same; and to begin with, Don Quixote delivered
a slash at one of them that laid open the leather jerkin he wore,
together with a great portion of his shoulder. The Yanguesans, seeing
themselves assaulted by only two men while they were so many, betook
themselves to their stakes, and driving the two into the middle they
began to lay on with great zeal and energy; in fact, at the second
blow they brought Sancho to the ground, and Don Quixote fared the same
way, all his skill and high mettle availing him nothing, and fate
willed it that he should fall at the feet of Rocinante, who had not
yet risen; whereby it may be seen how furiously stakes can pound in
angry boorish hands. Then, seeing the mischief they had done, the
Yanguesans with all the haste they could loaded their team and pursued
their journey, leaving the two adventurers a sorry sight and in
sorrier mood. Sancho was the first to come to, and finding himself
close to his master he called to him in a weak and doleful voice,
"Senor Don Quixote, ah, Senor Don Quixote!" "What wouldst thou,
brother Sancho?" answered Don Quixote in the same feeble suffering
tone as Sancho. "I would like, if it were possible," answered Sancho
Panza, "your worship to give me a couple of sups of that potion of the
fiery Blas, if it be that you have any to hand there; perhaps it will
serve for broken bones as well as for wounds." "If I only had it here,
wretch that I am, what more should we want?" said Don Quixote; "but I
swear to thee, Sancho Panza, on the faith of a knight-errant, ere two
days are over, unless fortune orders otherwise, I mean to have it in
my possession, or my hand will have lost its cunning." "But in how
many does your worship think we shall have the use of our feet?"
answered Sancho Panza. "For myself I must say I cannot guess how
many," said the battered knight Don Quixote; "but I take all the blame
upon myself, for I had no business to put hand to sword against men
who where not dubbed knights like myself, and so I believe that in
punishment for having transgressed the laws of chivalry the God of
battles has permitted this chastisement to be administered to me; for
which reason, brother Sancho, it is well thou shouldst receive a hint
on the matter which I am now about to mention to thee, for it is of
much importance to the welfare of both of us. It is at when thou shalt
see rabble of this sort offering us insult thou art not to wait till I
draw sword against them, for I shall not do so at all; but do thou
draw sword and chastise them to thy heart's content, and if any
knights come to their aid and defence I will take care to defend thee
and assail them with all my might; and thou hast already seen by a
thousand signs and proofs what the might of this strong arm of mine is
equal to"--so uplifted had the poor gentleman become through the
victory over the stout Biscayan. But Sancho did not so fully approve
of his master's admonition as to let it pass without saying in reply,
"Senor, I am a man of peace, meek and quiet, and I can put up with any
affront because I have a wife and children to support and bring up; so
let it be likewise a hint to your worship, as it cannot be a mandate,
that on no account will I draw sword either against clown or against
knight, and that here before God I forgive the insults that have been
offered me, whether they have been, are, or shall be offered me by
high or low, rich or poor, noble or commoner, not excepting any rank
or condition whatsoever." To all which his master said in reply, "I
wish I had breath enough to speak somewhat easily, and that the pain I
feel on this side would abate so as to let me explain to thee, Panza,
the mistake thou makest. Come now, sinner, suppose the wind of
fortune, hitherto so adverse, should turn in our favour, filling the
sails of our desires so that safely and without impediment we put into
port in some one of those islands I have promised thee, how would it
be with thee if on winning it I made thee lord of it? Why, thou wilt
make it well-nigh impossible through not being a knight nor having any
desire to be one, nor possessing the courage nor the will to avenge
insults or defend thy lordship; for thou must know that in newly
conquered kingdoms and provinces the minds of the inhabitants are
never so quiet nor so well disposed to the new lord that there is no
fear of their making some move to change matters once more, and try,
as they say, what chance may do for them; so it is essential that the
new possessor should have good sense to enable him to govern, and
valour to attack and defend himself, whatever may befall him." "In
what has now befallen us," answered Sancho, "I'd have been well
pleased to have that good sense and that valour your worship speaks
of, but I swear on the faith of a poor man I am more fit for plasters
than for arguments. See if your worship can get up, and let us help
Rocinante, though he does not deserve it, for he was the main cause of
all this thrashing. I never thought it of Rocinante, for I took him to
be a virtuous person and as quiet as myself. After all, they say right
that it takes a long time to come to know people, and that there is
nothing sure in this life. Who would have said that, after such mighty
slashes as your worship gave that unlucky knight-errant, there was
coming, travelling post and at the very heels of them, such a great
storm of sticks as has fallen upon our shoulders?" "And yet thine,
Sancho," replied Don Quixote, "ought to be used to such squalls; but
mine, reared in soft cloth and fine linen, it is plain they must feel
more keenly the pain of this mishap, and if it were not that I
imagine--why do I say imagine?--know of a certainty that all these
annoyances are very necessary accompaniments of the calling of arms, I
would lay me down here to die of pure vexation." To this the squire
replied, "Senor, as these mishaps are what one reaps of chivalry, tell
me if they happen very often, or if they have their own fixed times
for coming to pass; because it seems to me that after two harvests we
shall be no good for the third, unless God in his infinite mercy helps
us." "Know, friend Sancho," answered Don Quixote, "that the life of
knights-errant is subject to a thousand dangers and reverses, and
neither more nor less is it within immediate possibility for
knights-errant to become kings and emperors, as experience has shown
in the case of many different knights with whose histories I am
thoroughly acquainted; and I could tell thee now, if the pain would
let me, of some who simply by might of arm have risen to the high
stations I have mentioned; and those same, both before and after,
experienced divers misfortunes and miseries; for the valiant Amadis of
Gaul found himself in the power of his mortal enemy Arcalaus the
magician, who, it is positively asserted, holding him captive, gave
him more than two hundred lashes with the reins of his horse while
tied to one of the pillars of a court; and moreover there is a certain
recondite author of no small authority who says that the Knight of
Phoebus, being caught in a certain pitfall, which opened under his
feet in a certain castle, on falling found himself bound hand and foot
in a deep pit underground, where they administered to him one of those
things they call clysters, of sand and snow-water, that well-nigh
finished him; and if he had not been succoured in that sore extremity
by a sage, a great friend of his, it would have gone very hard with
the poor knight; so I may well suffer in company with such worthy
folk, for greater were the indignities which they had to suffer than
those which we suffer. For I would have thee know, Sancho, that there
are two kinds of lineages in the world; some there be tracing and
deriving their descent from kings and princes, whom time has reduced
little by little until they end in a point like a pyramid upside down;
and others who spring from the common herd and go on rising step by
step until they come to be great lords; so that the difference is that
the one were what they no longer are, and the others are what they
formerly were not. And I may be of such that after investigation my
origin may prove great and famous, with which the king, my
father-in-law that is to be, ought to be satisfied; and should he not
be, the princess will so love me that even though she well knew me to
be the son of a water-carrier, she will take me for her lord and
husband in spite of her father; if not, then it comes to seizing her
and carrying her off where I please; for time or death will put an end
to the wrath of her parents." "It comes to this, too," said Sancho,
"what some naughty people say, 'Never ask as a favour what thou canst
take by force;' though it would fit better to say, 'A clear escape is
better than good men's prayers.' I say so because if my lord the king,
your worship's father-in-law, will not condescend to give you my lady
the princess, there is nothing for it but, as your worship says, to
seize her and transport her. But the mischief is that until peace is
made and you come into the peaceful enjoyment of your kingdom, the
poor squire is famishing as far as rewards go, unless it be that the
confidante damsel that is to be his wife comes with the princess, and
that with her he tides over his bad luck until Heaven otherwise orders
things; for his master, I suppose, may as well give her to him at once
for a lawful wife." "Nobody can object to that," said Don Quixote.
"Then since that may be," said Sancho, "there is nothing for it but to
commend ourselves to God, and let fortune take what course it will."
"God guide it according to my wishes and thy wants," said Don Quixote,
"and mean be he who thinks himself mean." "In God's name let him be
so," said Sancho: "I am an old Christian, and to fit me for a count
that's enough." "And more than enough for thee," said Don Quixote;
"and even wert thou not, it would make no difference, because I being
the king can easily give thee nobility without purchase or service
rendered by thee, for when I make thee a count, then thou art at once
a gentleman; and they may say what they will, but by my faith they
will have to call thee 'your lordship,' whether they like it or not."
"Not a doubt of it; and I'll know how to support the tittle," said
Sancho. "Title thou shouldst say, not tittle," said his master. "So be
it," answered Sancho. "I say I will know how to behave, for once in my
life I was beadle of a brotherhood, and the beadle's gown sat so well
on me that all said I looked as if I was to be steward of the same
brotherhood. What will it be, then, when I put a duke's robe on my
back, or dress myself in gold and pearls like a count? I believe
they'll come a hundred leagues to see me." "Thou wilt look well," said
Don Quixote, "but thou must shave thy beard often, for thou hast it so
thick and rough and unkempt, that if thou dost not shave it every
second day at least, they will see what thou art at the distance of a
musket shot." "What more will it be," said Sancho, "than having a
barber, and keeping him at wages in the house? and even if it be
necessary, I will make him go behind me like a nobleman's equerry."
"Why, how dost thou know that noblemen have equerries behind them?"
asked Don Quixote. "I will tell you," answered Sancho. "Years ago I
was for a month at the capital and there I saw taking the air a very
small gentleman who they said was a very great man, and a man
following him on horseback in every turn he took, just as if he was
his tail. I asked why this man did not join the other man, instead of
always going behind him; they answered me that he was his equerry, and
that it was the custom with nobles to have such persons behind them,
and ever since then I know it, for I have never forgotten it." "Thou
art right," said Don Quixote, "and I cannot guess or explain what this
may mean; but stay; let us see if in this memorandum book there is
anything written by which we may be able to trace out or discover what
we want to know." He opened it, and the first thing he found in it,
written roughly but in a very good hand, was a sonnet, and reading it
aloud that Sancho might hear it, he found that it ran as follows:
SONNET Or Love is lacking in intelligence, Or to the height of cruelty
attains, Or else it is my doom to suffer pains Beyond the measure due
to my offence. But if Love be a God, it follows thence That he knows
all, and certain it remains No God loves cruelty; then who ordains
This penance that enthrals while it torments? It were a falsehood,
Chloe, thee to name; Such evil with such goodness cannot live; And
against Heaven I dare not charge the blame, I only know it is my fate
to die. To him who knows not whence his malady A miracle alone a cure
can give. "There is nothing to be learned from that rhyme," said
Sancho, "unless by that clue there's in it, one may draw out the ball
of the whole matter." "What clue is there?" said Don Quixote. "I
thought your worship spoke of a clue in it," said Sancho. "I only said
Chloe," replied Don Quixote; "and that no doubt, is the name of the
lady of whom the author of the sonnet complains; and, faith, he must
be a tolerable poet, or I know little of the craft." "Then your
worship understands rhyming too?" "And better than thou thinkest,"
replied Don Quixote, "as thou shalt see when thou carriest a letter
written in verse from beginning to end to my lady Dulcinea del Toboso,
for I would have thee know, Sancho, that if the naked truth,
undisguised by flattery, came to the ears of princes, times would be
different, and other ages would be reckoned iron ages more than ours,
which I hold to be the golden of these latter days. Profit by this
advice, Sancho, and report to me clearly and faithfully the truth of
what thou knowest touching what I have demanded of thee." "That I will
do with all my heart," replied Dorothea, "if it will not be wearisome
to you to hear of miseries and misfortunes." "It will not be
wearisome, senora," said Don Quixote; to which Dorothea replied,
"Well, if that be so, give me your attention." As soon as she said
this, Cardenio and the barber drew close to her side, eager to hear
what sort of story the quick-witted Dorothea would invent for herself;
and Sancho did the same, for he was as much taken in by her as his
master; and she having settled herself comfortably in the saddle, and
with the help of coughing and other preliminaries taken time to think,
began with great sprightliness of manner in this fashion. "First of
all, I would have you know, sirs, that my name is-" and here she
stopped for a moment, for she forgot the name the curate had given
her; but he came to her relief, seeing what her difficulty was, and
said, "It is no wonder, senora, that your highness should be confused
and embarrassed in telling the tale of your misfortunes; for such
afflictions often have the effect of depriving the sufferers of
memory, so that they do not even remember their own names, as is the
case now with your ladyship, who has forgotten that she is called the
Princess Micomicona, lawful heiress of the great kingdom of Micomicon;
and with this cue your highness may now recall to your sorrowful
recollection all you may wish to tell us." "That is the truth," said
the damsel; "but I think from this on I shall have no need of any
prompting, and I shall bring my true story safe into port, and here it
is. The king my father, who was called Tinacrio the Sapient, was very
learned in what they call magic arts, and became aware by his craft
that my mother, who was called Queen Jaramilla, was to die before he
did, and that soon after he too was to depart this life, and I was to
be left an orphan without father or mother. But all this, he declared,
did not so much grieve or distress him as his certain knowledge that a
prodigious giant, the lord of a great island close to our kingdom,
Pandafilando of the Scowl by name--for it is averred that, though his
eyes are properly placed and straight, he always looks askew as if he
squinted, and this he does out of malignity, to strike fear and terror
into those he looks at--that he knew, I say, that this giant on
becoming aware of my orphan condition would overrun my kingdom with a
mighty force and strip me of all, not leaving me even a small village
to shelter me; but that I could avoid all this ruin and misfortune if
I were willing to marry him; however, as far as he could see, he never
expected that I would consent to a marriage so unequal; and he said no
more than the truth in this, for it has never entered my mind to marry
that giant, or any other, let him be ever so great or enormous. My
father said, too, that when he was dead, and I saw Pandafilando about
to invade my kingdom, I was not to wait and attempt to defend myself,
for that would be destructive to me, but that I should leave the
kingdom entirely open to him if I wished to avoid the death and total
destruction of my good and loyal vassals, for there would be no
possibility of defending myself against the giant's devilish power;
and that I should at once with some of my followers set out for Spain,
where I should obtain relief in my distress on finding a certain
knight-errant whose fame by that time would extend over the whole
kingdom, and who would be called, if I remember rightly, Don Azote or
Don Gigote." "'Don Quixote,' he must have said, senora," observed
Sancho at this, "otherwise called the Knight of the Rueful
Countenance." "That is it," said Dorothea; "he said, moreover, that he
would be tall of stature and lank featured; and that on his right side
under the left shoulder, or thereabouts, he would have a grey mole
with hairs like bristles." On hearing this, Don Quixote said to his
squire, "Here, Sancho my son, bear a hand and help me to strip, for I
want to see if I am the knight that sage king foretold." "What does
your worship want to strip for?" said Dorothea. "To see if I have that
mole your father spoke of," answered Don Quixote. "There is no
occasion to strip," said Sancho; "for I know your worship has just
such a mole on the middle of your backbone, which is the mark of a
strong man." "That is enough," said Dorothea, "for with friends we
must not look too closely into trifles; and whether it be on the
shoulder or on the backbone matters little; it is enough if there is a
mole, be it where it may, for it is all the same flesh; no doubt my
good father hit the truth in every particular, and I have made a lucky
hit in commending myself to Don Quixote; for he is the one my father
spoke of, as the features of his countenance correspond with those
assigned to this knight by that wide fame he has acquired not only in
Spain but in all La Mancha; for I had scarcely landed at Osuna when I
heard such accounts of his achievements, that at once my heart told me
he was the very one I had come in search of." "But how did you land at
Osuna, senora," asked Don Quixote, "when it is not a seaport?" But
before Dorothea could reply the curate anticipated her, saying, "The
princess meant to say that after she had landed at Malaga the first
place where she heard of your worship was Osuna." "That is what I
meant to say," said Dorothea. "And that would be only natural," said
the curate. "Will your majesty please proceed?" "There is no more to
add," said Dorothea, "save that in finding Don Quixote I have had such
good fortune, that I already reckon and regard myself queen and
mistress of my entire dominions, since of his courtesy and magnanimity
he has granted me the boon of accompanying me whithersoever I may
conduct him, which will be only to bring him face to face with
Pandafilando of the Scowl, that he may slay him and restore to me what
has been unjustly usurped by him: for all this must come to pass
satisfactorily since my good father Tinacrio the Sapient foretold it,
who likewise left it declared in writing in Chaldee or Greek
characters (for I cannot read them), that if this predicted knight,
after having cut the giant's throat, should be disposed to marry me I
was to offer myself at once without demur as his lawful wife, and
yield him possession of my kingdom together with my person." "What
thinkest thou now, friend Sancho?" said Don Quixote at this. "Hearest
thou that? Did I not tell thee so? See how we have already got a
kingdom to govern and a queen to marry!" "On my oath it is so," said
Sancho; "and foul fortune to him who won't marry after slitting Senor
Pandahilado's windpipe! And then, how ill-favoured the queen is! I
wish the fleas in my bed were that sort!" And so saying he cut a
couple of capers in the air with every sign of extreme satisfaction,
and then ran to seize the bridle of Dorothea's mule, and checking it
fell on his knees before her, begging her to give him her hand to kiss
in token of his acknowledgment of her as his queen and mistress. Which
of the bystanders could have helped laughing to see the madness of the
master and the simplicity of the servant? Dorothea therefore gave her
hand, and promised to make him a great lord in her kingdom, when
Heaven should be so good as to permit her to recover and enjoy it, for
which Sancho returned thanks in words that set them all laughing
again. "This, sirs," continued Dorothea, "is my story; it only remains
to tell you that of all the attendants I took with me from my kingdom
I have none left except this well-bearded squire, for all were drowned
in a great tempest we encountered when in sight of port; and he and I
came to land on a couple of planks as if by a miracle; and indeed the
whole course of my life is a miracle and a mystery as you may have
observed; and if I have been over minute in any respect or not as
precise as I ought, let it be accounted for by what the licentiate
said at the beginning of my tale, that constant and excessive troubles
deprive the sufferers of their memory." "They shall not deprive me of
mine, exalted and worthy princess," said Don Quixote, "however great
and unexampled those which I shall endure in your service may be; and
here I confirm anew the boon I have promised you, and I swear to go
with you to the end of the world until I find myself in the presence
of your fierce enemy, whose haughty head I trust by the aid of my arm
to cut off with the edge of this--I will not say good sword, thanks to
Gines de Pasamonte who carried away mine"--(this he said between his
teeth, and then continued), "and when it has been cut off and you have
been put in peaceful possession of your realm it shall be left to your
own decision to dispose of your person as may be most pleasing to you;
for so long as my memory is occupied, my will enslaved, and my
understanding enthralled by her-I say no more--it is impossible for me
for a moment to contemplate marriage, even with a Phoenix." The last
words of his master about not wanting to marry were so disagreeable to
Sancho that raising his voice he exclaimed with great irritation: "By
my oath, Senor Don Quixote, you are not in your right senses; for how
can your worship possibly object to marrying such an exalted princess
as this? Do you think Fortune will offer you behind every stone such a
piece of luck as is offered you now? Is my lady Dulcinea fairer,
perchance? Not she; nor half as fair; and I will even go so far as to
say she does not come up to the shoe of this one here. A poor chance I
have of getting that county I am waiting for if your worship goes
looking for dainties in the bottom of the sea. I will bet my arm that
Camacho could bury Basilio in reals; and if that be so, as no doubt it
is, why dost thou deceive me, or wherefore seekest thou by craft to
deprive me of the means I might find of attaining my desire?" Anselmo
said no more, but he had said enough to cover Lothario with shame and
confusion, and he, feeling as it were his honour touched by having
been detected in a lie, swore to Anselmo that he would from that
moment devote himself to satisfying him without any deception, as he
would see if he had the curiosity to watch; though he need not take
the trouble, for the pains he would take to satisfy him would remove
all suspicions from his mind. Anselmo believed him, and to afford him
an opportunity more free and less liable to surprise, he resolved to
absent himself from his house for eight days, betaking himself to that
of a friend of his who lived in a village not far from the city; and,
the better to account for his departure to Camilla, he so arranged it
that the friend should send him a very pressing invitation. Unhappy,
shortsighted Anselmo, what art thou doing, what art thou plotting,
what art thou devising? Bethink thee thou art working against thyself,
plotting thine own dishonour, devising thine own ruin. Thy wife
Camilla is virtuous, thou dost possess her in peace and quietness, no
one assails thy happiness, her thoughts wander not beyond the walls of
thy house, thou art her heaven on earth, the object of her wishes, the
fulfilment of her desires, the measure wherewith she measures her
will, making it conform in all things to thine and Heaven's. If, then,
the mine of her honour, beauty, virtue, and modesty yields thee
without labour all the wealth it contains and thou canst wish for, why
wilt thou dig the earth in search of fresh veins, of new unknown
treasure, risking the collapse of all, since it but rests on the
feeble props of her weak nature? Bethink thee that from him who seeks
impossibilities that which is possible may with justice be withheld,
as was better expressed by a poet who said: 'Tis mine to seek for life
in death, Health in disease seek I, I seek in prison freedom's breath,
In traitors loyalty. So Fate that ever scorns to grant Or grace or
boon to me, Since what can never be I want, Denies me what might be.
The next day Anselmo took his departure for the village, leaving
instructions with Camilla that during his absence Lothario would come
to look after his house and to dine with her, and that she was to
treat him as she would himself. Camilla was distressed, as a discreet
and right-minded woman would be, at the orders her husband left her,
and bade him remember that it was not becoming that anyone should
occupy his seat at the table during his absence, and if he acted thus
from not feeling confidence that she would be able to manage his
house, let him try her this time, and he would find by experience that
she was equal to greater responsibilities. Anselmo replied that it was
his pleasure to have it so, and that she had only to submit and obey.
Camilla said she would do so, though against her will. Anselmo went,
and the next day Lothario came to his house, where he was received by
Camilla with a friendly and modest welcome; but she never suffered
Lothario to see her alone, for she was always attended by her men and
women servants, especially by a handmaid of hers, Leonela by name, to
whom she was much attached (for they had been brought up together from
childhood in her father's house), and whom she had kept with her after
her marriage with Anselmo. The first three days Lothario did not speak
to her, though he might have done so when they removed the cloth and
the servants retired to dine hastily; for such were Camilla's orders;
nay more, Leonela had directions to dine earlier than Camilla and
never to leave her side. She, however, having her thoughts fixed upon
other things more to her taste, and wanting that time and opportunity
for her own pleasures, did not always obey her mistress's commands,
but on the contrary left them alone, as if they had ordered her to do
so; but the modest bearing of Camilla, the calmness of her
countenance, the composure of her aspect were enough to bridle the
tongue of Lothario. But the influence which the many virtues of
Camilla exerted in imposing silence on Lothario's tongue proved
mischievous for both of them, for if his tongue was silent his
thoughts were busy, and could dwell at leisure upon the perfections of
Camilla's goodness and beauty one by one, charms enough to warm with
love a marble statue, not to say a heart of flesh. Lothario gazed upon
her when he might have been speaking to her, and thought how worthy of
being loved she was; and thus reflection began little by little to
assail his allegiance to Anselmo, and a thousand times he thought of
withdrawing from the city and going where Anselmo should never see him
nor he see Camilla. But already the delight he found in gazing on her
interposed and held him fast. He put a constraint upon himself, and
struggled to repel and repress the pleasure he found in contemplating
Camilla; when alone he blamed himself for his weakness, called himself
a bad friend, nay a bad Christian; then he argued the matter and
compared himself with Anselmo; always coming to the conclusion that
the folly and rashness of Anselmo had been worse than his
faithlessness, and that if he could excuse his intentions as easily
before God as with man, he had no reason to fear any punishment for
his offence. In short the beauty and goodness of Camilla, joined with
the opportunity which the blind husband had placed in his hands,
overthrew the loyalty of Lothario; and giving heed to nothing save the
object towards which his inclinations led him, after Anselmo had been
three days absent, during which he had been carrying on a continual
struggle with his passion, he began to make love to Camilla with so
much vehemence and warmth of language that she was overwhelmed with
amazement, and could only rise from her place and retire to her room
without answering him a word. But the hope which always springs up
with love was not weakened in Lothario by this repelling demeanour; on
the contrary his passion for Camilla increased, and she discovering in
him what she had never expected, knew not what to do; and considering
it neither safe nor right to give him the chance or opportunity of
speaking to her again, she resolved to send, as she did that very
night, one of her servants with a letter to Anselmo, in which she
addressed the following words to him. CHAPTER XXXIV. IN WHICH IS
CONTINUED THE NOVEL OF "THE ILL-ADVISED CURIOSITY" "It is commonly
said that an army looks ill without its general and a castle without
its castellan, and I say that a young married woman looks still worse
without her husband unless there are very good reasons for it. I find
myself so ill at ease without you, and so incapable of enduring this
separation, that unless you return quickly I shall have to go for
relief to my parents' house, even if I leave yours without a
protector; for the one you left me, if indeed he deserved that title,
has, I think, more regard to his own pleasure than to what concerns
you: as you are possessed of discernment I need say no more to you,
nor indeed is it fitting I should say more." Anselmo received this
letter, and from it he gathered that Lothario had already begun his
task and that Camilla must have replied to him as he would have
wished; and delighted beyond measure at such intelligence he sent word
to her not to leave his house on any account, as he would very shortly
return. Camilla was astonished at Anselmo's reply, which placed her in
greater perplexity than before, for she neither dared to remain in her
own house, nor yet to go to her parents'; for in remaining her virtue
was imperilled, and in going she was opposing her husband's commands.
Finally she decided upon what was the worse course for her, to remain,
resolving not to fly from the presence of Lothario, that she might not
give food for gossip to her servants; and she now began to regret
having written as she had to her husband, fearing he might imagine
that Lothario had perceived in her some lightness which had impelled
him to lay aside the respect he owed her; but confident of her
rectitude she put her trust in God and in her own virtuous intentions,
with which she hoped to resist in silence all the solicitations of
Lothario, without saying anything to her husband so as not to involve
him in any quarrel or trouble; and she even began to consider how to
excuse Lothario to Anselmo when he should ask her what it was that
induced her to write that letter. With these resolutions, more
honourable than judicious or effectual, she remained the next day
listening to Lothario, who pressed his suit so strenuously that
Camilla's firmness began to waver, and her virtue had enough to do to
come to the rescue of her eyes and keep them from showing signs of a
certain tender compassion which the tears and appeals of Lothario had
awakened in her bosom. Lothario observed all this, and it inflamed him
all the more. In short he felt that while Anselmo's absence afforded
time and opportunity he must press the siege of the fortress, and so
he assailed her self-esteem with praises of her beauty, for there is
nothing that more quickly reduces and levels the castle towers of fair
women's vanity than vanity itself upon the tongue of flattery. In fact
with the utmost assiduity he undermined the rock of her purity with
such engines that had Camilla been of brass she must have fallen. He
wept, he entreated, he promised, he flattered, he importuned, he
pretended with so much feeling and apparent sincerity, that he
overthrew the virtuous resolves of Camilla and won the triumph he
least expected and most longed for. Camilla yielded, Camilla fell; but
what wonder if the friendship of Lothario could not stand firm? A
clear proof to us that the passion of love is to be conquered only by
flying from it, and that no one should engage in a struggle with an
enemy so mighty; for divine strength is needed to overcome his human
power. Leonela alone knew of her mistress's weakness, for the two
false friends and new lovers were unable to conceal it. Lothario did
not care to tell Camilla the object Anselmo had in view, nor that he
had afforded him the opportunity of attaining such a result, lest she
should undervalue his love and think that it was by chance and without
intending it and not of his own accord that he had made love to her. A
few days later Anselmo returned to his house and did not perceive what
it had lost, that which he so lightly treated and so highly prized. He
went at once to see Lothario, and found him at home; they embraced
each other, and Anselmo asked for the tidings of his life or his
death. "The tidings I have to give thee, Anselmo my friend," said
Lothario, "are that thou dost possess a wife that is worthy to be the
pattern and crown of all good wives. The words that I have addressed
to her were borne away on the wind, my promises have been despised, my
presents have been refused, such feigned tears as I shed have been
turned into open ridicule. In short, as Camilla is the essence of all
beauty, so is she the treasure-house where purity dwells, and
gentleness and modesty abide with all the virtues that can confer
praise, honour, and happiness upon a woman. Take back thy money, my
friend; here it is, and I have had no need to touch it, for the
chastity of Camilla yields not to things so base as gifts or promises.
Be content, Anselmo, and refrain from making further proof; and as
thou hast passed dryshod through the sea of those doubts and
suspicions that are and may be entertained of women, seek not to
plunge again into the deep ocean of new embarrassments, or with
another pilot make trial of the goodness and strength of the bark that
Heaven has granted thee for thy passage across the sea of this world;
but reckon thyself now safe in port, moor thyself with the anchor of
sound reflection, and rest in peace until thou art called upon to pay
that debt which no nobility on earth can escape paying." Anselmo was
completely satisfied by the words of Lothario, and believed them as
fully as if they had been spoken by an oracle; nevertheless he begged
of him not to relinquish the undertaking, were it but for the sake of
curiosity and amusement; though thenceforward he need not make use of
the same earnest endeavours as before; all he wished him to do was to
write some verses to her, praising her under the name of Chloris, for
he himself would give her to understand that he was in love with a
lady to whom he had given that name to enable him to sing her praises
with the decorum due to her modesty; and if Lothario were unwilling to
take the trouble of writing the verses he would compose them himself.
"That will not be necessary," said Lothario, "for the muses are not
such enemies of mine but that they visit me now and then in the course
of the year. Do thou tell Camilla what thou hast proposed about a
pretended amour of mine; as for the verses will make them, and if not
as good as the subject deserves, they shall be at least the best I can
produce." An agreement to this effect was made between the friends,
the ill-advised one and the treacherous, and Anselmo returning to his
house asked Camilla the question she already wondered he had not asked
before--what it was that had caused her to write the letter she had
sent him. Camilla replied that it had seemed to her that Lothario
looked at her somewhat more freely than when he had been at home; but
that now she was undeceived and believed it to have been only her own
imagination, for Lothario now avoided seeing her, or being alone with
her. Anselmo told her she might be quite easy on the score of that
suspicion, for he knew that Lothario was in love with a damsel of rank
in the city whom he celebrated under the name of Chloris, and that
even if he were not, his fidelity and their great friendship left no
room for fear. Had not Camilla, however, been informed beforehand by
Lothario that this love for Chloris was a pretence, and that he
himself had told Anselmo of it in order to be able sometimes to give
utterance to the praises of Camilla herself, no doubt she would have
fallen into the despairing toils of jealousy; but being forewarned she
received the startling news without uneasiness. The next day as the
three were at table Anselmo asked Lothario to recite something of what
he had composed for his mistress Chloris; for as Camilla did not know
her, he might safely say what he liked. "Even did she know her,"
returned Lothario, "I would hide nothing, for when a lover praises his
lady's beauty, and charges her with cruelty, he casts no imputation
upon her fair name; at any rate, all I can say is that yesterday I
made a sonnet on the ingratitude of this Chloris, which goes thus:
SONNET At midnight, in the silence, when the eyes Of happier mortals
balmy slumbers close, The weary tale of my unnumbered woes To Chloris
and to Heaven is wont to rise. And when the light of day returning
dyes The portals of the east with tints of rose, With undiminished
force my sorrow flows In broken accents and in burning sighs. And when
the sun ascends his star-girt throne, And on the earth pours down his
midday beams, Noon but renews my wailing and my tears; And with the
night again goes up my moan. Yet ever in my agony it seems To me that
neither Heaven nor Chloris hears." The sonnet pleased Camilla, and
still more Anselmo, for he praised it and said the lady was
excessively cruel who made no return for sincerity so manifest. On
which Camilla said, "Then all that love-smitten poets say is true?"
"As poets they do not tell the truth," replied Lothario; "but as
lovers they are not more defective in expression than they are
truthful." "There is no doubt of that," observed Anselmo, anxious to
support and uphold Lothario's ideas with Camilla, who was as
regardless of his design as she was deep in love with Lothario; and so
taking delight in anything that was his, and knowing that his thoughts
and writings had her for their object, and that she herself was the
real Chloris, she asked him to repeat some other sonnet or verses if
he recollected any. "I do," replied Lothario, "but I do not think it
as good as the first one, or, more correctly speaking, less bad; but
you can easily judge, for it is this. SONNET I know that I am doomed;
death is to me As certain as that thou, ungrateful fair, Dead at thy
feet shouldst see me lying, ere My heart repented of its love for
thee. If buried in oblivion I should be, Bereft of life, fame, favour,
even there It would be found that I thy image bear Deep graven in my
breast for all to see. This like some holy relic do I prize To save me
from the fate my truth entails, Truth that to thy hard heart its
vigour owes. Alas for him that under lowering skies, In peril o'er a
trackless ocean sails, Where neither friendly port nor pole-star
shows." Anselmo praised this second sonnet too, as he had praised the
first; and so he went on adding link after link to the chain with
which he was binding himself and making his dishonour secure; for when
Lothario was doing most to dishonour him he told him he was most
honoured; and thus each step that Camilla descended towards the depths
of her abasement, she mounted, in his opinion, towards the summit of
virtue and fair fame. It so happened that finding herself on one
occasion alone with her maid, Camilla said to her, "I am ashamed to
think, my dear Leonela, how lightly I have valued myself that I did
not compel Lothario to purchase by at least some expenditure of time
that full possession of me that I so quickly yielded him of my own
free will. I fear that he will think ill of my pliancy or lightness,
not considering the irresistible influence he brought to bear upon
me." "Let not that trouble you, my lady," said Leonela, "for it does
not take away the value of the thing given or make it the less
precious to give it quickly if it be really valuable and worthy of
being prized; nay, they are wont to say that he who gives quickly
gives twice." "They say also," said Camilla, "that what costs little
is valued less." "That saying does not hold good in your case,"
replied Leonela, "for love, as I have heard say, sometimes flies and
sometimes walks; with this one it runs, with that it moves slowly;
some it cools, others it burns; some it wounds, others it slays; it
begins the course of its desires, and at the same moment completes and
ends it; in the morning it will lay siege to a fortress and by night
will have taken it, for there is no power that can resist it; so what
are you in dread of, what do you fear, when the same must have
befallen Lothario, love having chosen the absence of my lord as the
instrument for subduing you? and it was absolutely necessary to
complete then what love had resolved upon, without affording the time
to let Anselmo return and by his presence compel the work to be left
unfinished; for love has no better agent for carrying out his designs
than opportunity; and of opportunity he avails himself in all his
feats, especially at the outset. All this I know well myself, more by
experience than by hearsay, and some day, senora, I will enlighten you
on the subject, for I am of your flesh and blood too. Moreover, lady
Camilla, you did not surrender yourself or yield so quickly but that
first you saw Lothario's whole soul in his eyes, in his sighs, in his
words, his promises and his gifts, and by it and his good qualities
perceived how worthy he was of your love. This, then, being the case,
let not these scrupulous and prudish ideas trouble your imagination,
but be assured that Lothario prizes you as you do him, and rest
content and satisfied that as you are caught in the noose of love it
is one of worth and merit that has taken you, and one that has not
only the four S's that they say true lovers ought to have, but a
complete alphabet; only listen to me and you will see how I can repeat
it by rote. He is to my eyes and thinking, Amiable, Brave, Courteous,
Distinguished, Elegant, Fond, Gay, Honourable, Illustrious, Loyal,
Manly, Noble, Open, Polite, Quickwitted, Rich, and the S's according
to the saying, and then Tender, Veracious: X does not suit him, for it
is a rough letter; Y has been given already; and Z Zealous for your
honour." Camilla laughed at her maid's alphabet, and perceived her to
be more experienced in love affairs than she said, which she admitted,
confessing to Camilla that she had love passages with a young man of
good birth of the same city. Camilla was uneasy at this, dreading lest
it might prove the means of endangering her honour, and asked whether
her intrigue had gone beyond words, and she with little shame and much
effrontery said it had; for certain it is that ladies' imprudences
make servants shameless, who, when they see their mistresses make a
false step, think nothing of going astray themselves, or of its being
known. All that Camilla could do was to entreat Leonela to say nothing
about her doings to him whom she called her lover, and to conduct her
own affairs secretly lest they should come to the knowledge of Anselmo
or of Lothario. Leonela said she would, but kept her word in such a
way that she confirmed Camilla's apprehension of losing her reputation
through her means; for this abandoned and bold Leonela, as soon as she
perceived that her mistress's demeanour was not what it was wont to
be, had the audacity to introduce her lover into the house, confident
that even if her mistress saw him she would not dare to expose him;
for the sins of mistresses entail this mischief among others; they
make themselves the slaves of their own servants, and are obliged to
hide their laxities and depravities; as was the case with Camilla, who
though she perceived, not once but many times, that Leonela was with
her lover in some room of the house, not only did not dare to chide
her, but afforded her opportunities for concealing him and removed all
difficulties, lest he should be seen by her husband. She was unable,
however, to prevent him from being seen on one occasion, as he sallied
forth at daybreak, by Lothario, who, not knowing who he was, at first
took him for a spectre; but, as soon as he saw him hasten away,
muffling his face with his cloak and concealing himself carefully and
cautiously, he rejected this foolish idea, and adopted another, which
would have been the ruin of all had not Camilla found a remedy. It did
not occur to Lothario that this man he had seen issuing at such an
untimely hour from Anselmo's house could have entered it on Leonela's
account, nor did he even remember there was such a person as Leonela;
all he thought was that as Camilla had been light and yielding with
him, so she had been with another; for this further penalty the erring
woman's sin brings with it, that her honour is distrusted even by him
to whose overtures and persuasions she has yielded; and he believes
her to have surrendered more easily to others, and gives implicit
credence to every suspicion that comes into his mind. All Lothario's
good sense seems to have failed him at this juncture; all his prudent
maxims escaped his memory; for without once reflecting rationally, and
without more ado, in his impatience and in the blindness of the
jealous rage that gnawed his heart, and dying to revenge himself upon
Camilla, who had done him no wrong, before Anselmo had risen he
hastened to him and said to him, "Know, Anselmo, that for several days
past I have been struggling with myself, striving to withhold from
thee what it is no longer possible or right that I should conceal from
thee. Know that Camilla's fortress has surrendered and is ready to
submit to my will; and if I have been slow to reveal this fact to
thee, it was in order to see if it were some light caprice of hers, or
if she sought to try me and ascertain if the love I began to make to
her with thy permission was made with a serious intention. I thought,
too, that she, if she were what she ought to be, and what we both
believed her, would have ere this given thee information of my
addresses; but seeing that she delays, I believe the truth of the
promise she has given me that the next time thou art absent from the
house she will grant me an interview in the closet where thy jewels
are kept (and it was true that Camilla used to meet him there); but I
do not wish thee to rush precipitately to take vengeance, for the sin
is as yet only committed in intention, and Camilla's may change
perhaps between this and the appointed time, and repentance spring up
in its place. As hitherto thou hast always followed my advice wholly
or in part, follow and observe this that I will give thee now, so
that, without mistake, and with mature deliberation, thou mayest
satisfy thyself as to what may seem the best course; pretend to absent
thyself for two or three days as thou hast been wont to do on other
occasions, and contrive to hide thyself in the closet; for the
tapestries and other things there afford great facilities for thy
concealment, and then thou wilt see with thine own eyes and I with
mine what Camilla's purpose may be. And if it be a guilty one, which
may be feared rather than expected, with silence, prudence, and
discretion thou canst thyself become the instrument of punishment for
the wrong done thee." Anselmo was amazed, overwhelmed, and astounded
at the words of Lothario, which came upon him at a time when he least
expected to hear them, for he now looked upon Camilla as having
triumphed over the pretended attacks of Lothario, and was beginning to
enjoy the glory of her victory. He remained silent for a considerable
time, looking on the ground with fixed gaze, and at length said, "Thou
hast behaved, Lothario, as I expected of thy friendship: I will follow
thy advice in everything; do as thou wilt, and keep this secret as
thou seest it should be kept in circumstances so unlooked for."
Lothario gave him his word, but after leaving him he repented
altogether of what he had said to him, perceiving how foolishly he had
acted, as he might have revenged himself upon Camilla in some less
cruel and degrading way. He cursed his want of sense, condemned his
hasty resolution, and knew not what course to take to undo the
mischief or find some ready escape from it. At last he decided upon
revealing all to Camilla, and, as there was no want of opportunity for
doing so, he found her alone the same day; but she, as soon as she had
the chance of speaking to him, said, "Lothario my friend, I must tell
thee I have a sorrow in my heart which fills it so that it seems ready
to burst; and it will be a wonder if it does not; for the audacity of
Leonela has now reached such a pitch that every night she conceals a
gallant of hers in this house and remains with him till morning, at
the expense of my reputation; inasmuch as it is open to anyone to
question it who may see him quitting my house at such unseasonable
hours; but what distresses me is that I cannot punish or chide her,
for her privity to our intrigue bridles my mouth and keeps me silent
about hers, while I am dreading that some catastrophe will come of
it." As Camilla said this Lothario at first imagined it was some
device to delude him into the idea that the man he had seen going out
was Leonela's lover and not hers; but when he saw how she wept and
suffered, and begged him to help her, he became convinced of the
truth, and the conviction completed his confusion and remorse;
however, he told Camilla not to distress herself, as he would take
measures to put a stop to the insolence of Leonela. At the same time
he told her what, driven by the fierce rage of jealousy, he had said
to Anselmo, and how he had arranged to hide himself in the closet that
he might there see plainly how little she preserved her fidelity to
him; and he entreated her pardon for this madness, and her advice as
to how to repair it, and escape safely from the intricate labyrinth in
which his imprudence had involved him. Camilla was struck with alarm
at hearing what Lothario said, and with much anger, and great good
sense, she reproved him and rebuked his base design and the foolish
and mischievous resolution he had made; but as woman has by nature a
nimbler wit than man for good and for evil, though it is apt to fail
when she sets herself deliberately to reason, Camilla on the spur of
the moment thought of a way to remedy what was to all appearance
irremediable, and told Lothario to contrive that the next day Anselmo
should conceal himself in the place he mentioned, for she hoped from
his concealment to obtain the means of their enjoying themselves for
the future without any apprehension; and without revealing her purpose
to him entirely she charged him to be careful, as soon as Anselmo was
concealed, to come to her when Leonela should call him, and to all she
said to him to answer as he would have answered had he not known that
Anselmo was listening. Lothario pressed her to explain her intention
fully, so that he might with more certainty and precaution take care
to do what he saw to be needful. "I tell you," said Camilla, "there is
nothing to take care of except to answer me what I shall ask you;" for
she did not wish to explain to him beforehand what she meant to do,
fearing lest he should be unwilling to follow out an idea which seemed
to her such a good one, and should try or devise some other less
practicable plan. Lothario then retired, and the next day Anselmo,
under pretence of going to his friend's country house, took his
departure, and then returned to conceal himself, which he was able to
do easily, as Camilla and Leonela took care to give him the
opportunity; and so he placed himself in hiding in the state of
agitation that it may be imagined he would feel who expected to see
the vitals of his honour laid bare before his eyes, and found himself
on the point of losing the supreme blessing he thought he possessed in
his beloved Camilla. Having made sure of Anselmo's being in his
hiding-place, Camilla and Leonela entered the closet, and the instant
she set foot within it Camilla said, with a deep sigh, "Ah! dear
Leonela, would it not be better, before I do what I am unwilling you
should know lest you should seek to prevent it, that you should take
Anselmo's dagger that I have asked of you and with it pierce this vile
heart of mine? But no; there is no reason why I should conceal it from
you, while my servant here is taking off my armour I will tell you the
true state of the case, without leaving out anything. You must know,
senor, that I am called the bachelor Samson Carrasco. I am of the same
village as Don Quixote of La Mancha, whose craze and folly make all of
us who know him feel pity for him, and I am one of those who have felt
it most; and persuaded that his chance of recovery lay in quiet and
keeping at home and in his own house, I hit upon a device for keeping
him there. Three months ago, therefore, I went out to meet him as a
knight-errant, under the assumed name of the Knight of the Mirrors,
intending to engage him in combat and overcome him without hurting
him, making it the condition of our combat that the vanquished should
be at the disposal of the victor. What I meant to demand of him (for I
regarded him as vanquished already) was that he should return to his
own village, and not leave it for a whole year, by which time he might
be cured. But fate ordered it otherwise, for he vanquished me and
unhorsed me, and so my plan failed. He went his way, and I came back
conquered, covered with shame, and sorely bruised by my fall, which
was a particularly dangerous one. But this did not quench my desire to
meet him again and overcome him, as you have seen to-day. And as he is
so scrupulous in his observance of the laws of knight-errantry, he
will, no doubt, in order to keep his word, obey the injunction I have
laid upon him. This, senor, is how the matter stands, and I have
nothing more to tell you. I implore of you not to betray me, or tell
Don Quixote who I am; so that my honest endeavours may be successful,
and that a man of excellent wits--were he only rid of the fooleries of
chivalry--may get them back again." "O senor," said Don Antonio, "may
God forgive you the wrong you have done the whole world in trying to
bring the most amusing madman in it back to his senses. Do you not
see, senor, that the gain by Don Quixote's sanity can never equal the
enjoyment his crazes give? But my belief is that all the senor
bachelor's pains will be of no avail to bring a man so hopelessly
cracked to his senses again; and if it were not uncharitable, I would
say may Don Quixote never be cured, for by his recovery we lose not
only his own drolleries, but his squire Sancho Panza's too, any one of
which is enough to turn melancholy itself into merriment. However,
I'll hold my peace and say nothing to him, and we'll see whether I am
right in my suspicion that Senor Carrasco's efforts will be
fruitless." The bachelor replied that at all events the affair
promised well, and he hoped for a happy result from it; and putting
his services at Don Antonio's commands he took his leave of him; and
having had his armour packed at once upon a mule, he rode away from
the city the same day on the horse he rode to battle, and returned to
his own country without meeting any adventure calling for record in
this veracious history. Don Antonio reported to the viceroy what
Carrasco told him, and the viceroy was not very well pleased to hear
it, for with Don Quixote's retirement there was an end to the
amusement of all who knew anything of his mad doings. Six days did Don
Quixote keep his bed, dejected, melancholy, moody and out of sorts,
brooding over the unhappy event of his defeat. Sancho strove to
comfort him, and among other things he said to him, "Hold up your
head, senor, and be of good cheer if you can, and give thanks to
heaven that if you have had a tumble to the ground you have not come
off with a broken rib; and, as you know that 'where they give they
take,' and that 'there are not always fletches where there are pegs,'
a fig for the doctor, for there's no need of him to cure this ailment.
Let us go home, and give over going about in search of adventures in
strange lands and places; rightly looked at, it is I that am the
greater loser, though it is your worship that has had the worse usage.
With the government I gave up all wish to be a governor again, but I
did not give up all longing to be a count; and that will never come to
pass if your worship gives up becoming a king by renouncing the
calling of chivalry; and so my hopes are going to turn into smoke."
"Peace, Sancho," said Don Quixote; "thou seest my suspension and
retirement is not to exceed a year; I shall soon return to my honoured
calling, and I shall not be at a loss for a kingdom to win and a
county to bestow on thee." "May God hear it and sin be deaf," said
Sancho; "I have always heard say that 'a good hope is better than a
bad holding, and a good grievance better than a bad compensation. I
speak in this way, Sancho, to show you that I can shower down proverbs
just as well as yourself; and in short, I mean to say, and I do say,
that if you don't like to come on reward with me, and run the same
chance that I run, God be with you and make a saint of you; for I
shall find plenty of squires more obedient and painstaking, and not so
thickheaded or talkative as you are." When Sancho heard his master's
firm, resolute language, a cloud came over the sky with him and the
wings of his heart drooped, for he had made sure that his master would
not go without him for all the wealth of the world; and as he stood
there dumbfoundered and moody, Samson Carrasco came in with the
housekeeper and niece, who were anxious to hear by what arguments he
was about to dissuade their master from going to seek adventures. The
arch wag Samson came forward, and embracing him as he had done before,
said with a loud voice, "O flower of knight-errantry! O shining light
of arms! O honour and mirror of the Spanish nation! may God Almighty
in his infinite power grant that any person or persons, who would
impede or hinder thy third sally, may find no way out of the labyrinth
of their schemes, nor ever accomplish what they most desire!" And
then, turning to the housekeeper, he said, "Mistress housekeeper may
just as well give over saying the prayer of Santa Apollonia, for I
know it is the positive determination of the spheres that Senor Don
Quixote shall proceed to put into execution his new and lofty designs;
and I should lay a heavy burden on my conscience did I not urge and
persuade this knight not to keep the might of his strong arm and the
virtue of his valiant spirit any longer curbed and checked, for by his
inactivity he is defrauding the world of the redress of wrongs, of the
protection of orphans, of the honour of virgins, of the aid of widows,
and of the support of wives, and other matters of this kind
appertaining, belonging, proper and peculiar to the order of
knight-errantry. On, then, my lord Don Quixote, beautiful and brave,
let your worship and highness set out to-day rather than to-morrow;
and if anything be needed for the execution of your purpose, here am I
ready in person and purse to supply the want; and were it requisite to
attend your magnificence as squire, I should esteem it the happiest
good fortune." At this, Don Quixote, turning to Sancho, said, "Did I
not tell thee, Sancho, there would be squires enough and to spare for
me? See now who offers to become one; no less than the illustrious
bachelor Samson Carrasco, the perpetual joy and delight of the courts
of the Salamancan schools, sound in body, discreet, patient under heat
or cold, hunger or thirst, with all the qualifications requisite to
make one, showing him sagacious in foreseeing the wiles of the enemy,
eloquent in speech to encourage or restrain his soldiers, ripe in
counsel, rapid in resolve, as bold in biding his time as in pressing
the attack; now picturing some sad tragic incident, now some joyful
and unexpected event; here a beauteous lady, virtuous, wise, and
modest; there a Christian knight, brave and gentle; here a lawless,
barbarous braggart; there a courteous prince, gallant and gracious;
setting forth the devotion and loyalty of vassals, the greatness and
generosity of nobles. "Or again," said he, "the author may show
himself to be an astronomer, or a skilled cosmographer, or musician,
or one versed in affairs of state, and sometimes he will have a chance
of coming forward as a magician if he likes. He can set forth the
craftiness of Ulysses, the piety of AEneas, the valour of Achilles,
the misfortunes of Hector, the treachery of Sinon, the friendship of
Euryalus, the generosity of Alexander, the boldness of Caesar, the
clemency and truth of Trajan, the fidelity of Zopyrus, the wisdom of
Cato, and in short all the faculties that serve to make an illustrious
man perfect, now uniting them in one individual, again distributing
them among many; and if this be done with charm of style and ingenious
invention, aiming at the truth as much as possible, he will assuredly
weave a web of bright and varied threads that, when finished, will
display such perfection and beauty that it will attain the worthiest
object any writing can seek, which, as I said before, is to give
instruction and pleasure combined; for the unrestricted range of these
books enables the author to show his powers, epic, lyric, tragic, or
comic, and all the moods the sweet and winning arts of poesy and
oratory are capable of; for the epic may be written in prose just as
well as in verse." CHAPTER XLVIII. IN WHICH THE CANON PURSUES THE
SUBJECT OF THE BOOKS OF CHIVALRY, WITH OTHER MATTERS WORTHY OF HIS WIT
"It is as you say, senor canon," said the curate; "and for that reason
those who have hitherto written books of the sort deserve all the more
censure for writing without paying any attention to good taste or the
rules of art, by which they might guide themselves and become as
famous in prose as the two princes of Greek and Latin poetry are in
verse." "I myself, at any rate," said the canon, "was once tempted to
write a book of chivalry in which all the points I have mentioned were
to be observed; and if I must own the truth I have more than a hundred
sheets written; and to try if it came up to my own opinion of it, I
showed them to persons who were fond of this kind of reading, to
learned and intelligent men as well as to ignorant people who cared
for nothing but the pleasure of listening to nonsense, and from all I
obtained flattering approval; nevertheless I proceeded no farther with
it, as well because it seemed to me an occupation inconsistent with my
profession, as because I perceived that the fools are more numerous
than the wise; and, though it is better to be praised by the wise few
than applauded by the foolish many, I have no mind to submit myself to
the stupid judgment of the silly public, to whom the reading of such
books falls for the most part. "But what most of all made me hold my
hand and even abandon all idea of finishing it was an argument I put
to myself taken from the plays that are acted now-a-days, which was in
this wise: if those that are now in vogue, as well those that are pure
invention as those founded on history, are, all or most of them,
downright nonsense and things that have neither head nor tail, like
that affair of the answer to the letter, and that other of six or
eight days ago, which is not yet in history, that is to say, the
affair of the enchantment of my lady Dulcinea; for I made him believe
she is enchanted, though there's no more truth in it than over the
hills of Ubeda." The duchess begged him to tell her about the
enchantment or deception, so Sancho told the whole story exactly as it
had happened, and his hearers were not a little amused by it; and then
resuming, the duchess said, "In consequence of what worthy Sancho has
told me, a doubt starts up in my mind, and there comes a kind of
whisper to my ear that says, 'If Don Quixote be mad, crazy, and
cracked, and Sancho Panza his squire knows it, and, notwithstanding,
serves and follows him, and goes trusting to his empty promises, there
can be no doubt he must be still madder and sillier than his master;
and that being so, it will be cast in your teeth, senora duchess, if
you give the said Sancho an island to govern; for how will he who does
not know how to govern himself know how to govern others?'" "By God,
senora," said Sancho, "but that doubt comes timely; but your grace may
say it out, and speak plainly, or as you like; for I know what you say
is true, and if I were wise I should have left my master long ago; but
this was my fate, this was my bad luck; I can't help it, I must follow
him; we're from the same village, I've eaten his bread, I'm fond of
him, I'm grateful, he gave me his ass-colts, and above all I'm
faithful; so it's quite impossible for anything to separate us, except
the pickaxe and shovel. And if your highness does not like to give me
the island because I'm a fool, like a wise man I will take care to
give myself no trouble about it; I have heard say that 'behind the
cross there's the devil,' and that 'all that glitters is not gold,'
and that from among the oxen, and the ploughs, and the yokes, Wamba
the husbandman was taken to be made King of Spain, and from among
brocades, and pleasures, and riches, Roderick was taken to be devoured
by adders, if the verses of the old ballads don't lie." "To be sure
they don't lie!" exclaimed Dona Rodriguez, the duenna, who was one of
the listeners. "Why, there's a ballad that says they put King Rodrigo
alive into a tomb full of toads, and adders, and lizards, and that two
days afterwards the king, in a plaintive, feeble voice, cried out from
within the tomb-- They gnaw me now, they gnaw me now, There where I
most did sin. And according to that the gentleman has good reason to
say he would rather be a labouring man than a king, if vermin are to
eat him." The duchess could not help laughing at the simplicity of her
duenna, or wondering at the language and proverbs of Sancho, to whom
she said, "Worthy Sancho knows very well that when once a knight has
made a promise he strives to keep it, though it should cost him his
life. But now Don Fernando's friends, as well as the curate and the
barber, who had been present all the while, not forgetting the worthy
Sancho Panza, ran forward and gathered round Don Fernando, entreating
him to have regard for the tears of Dorothea, and not suffer her
reasonable hopes to be disappointed, since, as they firmly believed,
what she said was but the truth; and bidding him observe that it was
not, as it might seem, by accident, but by a special disposition of
Providence that they had all met in a place where no one could have
expected a meeting. And the curate bade him remember that only death
could part Luscinda from Cardenio; that even if some sword were to
separate them they would think their death most happy; and that in a
case that admitted of no remedy his wisest course was, by conquering
and putting a constraint upon himself, to show a generous mind, and of
his own accord suffer these two to enjoy the happiness Heaven had
granted them. He bade him, too, turn his eyes upon the beauty of
Dorothea and he would see that few if any could equal much less excel
her; while to that beauty should be added her modesty and the
surpassing love she bore him. But besides all this, he reminded him
that if he prided himself on being a gentleman and a Christian, he
could not do otherwise than keep his plighted word; and that in doing
so he would obey God and meet the approval of all sensible people, who
know and recognised it to be the privilege of beauty, even in one of
humble birth, provided virtue accompany it, to be able to raise itself
to the level of any rank, without any slur upon him who places it upon
an equality with himself; and furthermore that when the potent sway of
passion asserts itself, so long as there be no mixture of sin in it,
he is not to be blamed who gives way to it. To be brief, they added to
these such other forcible arguments that Don Fernando's manly heart,
being after all nourished by noble blood, was touched, and yielded to
the truth which, even had he wished it, he could not gainsay; and he
showed his submission, and acceptance of the good advice that had been
offered to him, by stooping down and embracing Dorothea, saying to
her, "Rise, dear lady, it is not right that what I hold in my heart
should be kneeling at my feet; and if until now I have shown no sign
of what I own, it may have been by Heaven's decree in order that,
seeing the constancy with which you love me, I may learn to value you
as you deserve. What I entreat of you is that you reproach me not with
my transgression and grievous wrong-doing; for the same cause and
force that drove me to make you mine impelled me to struggle against
being yours; and to prove this, turn and look at the eyes of the now
happy Luscinda, and you will see in them an excuse for all my errors:
and as she has found and gained the object of her desires, and I have
found in you what satisfies all my wishes, may she live in peace and
contentment as many happy years with her Cardenio, as on my knees I
pray Heaven to allow me to live with my Dorothea;" and with these
words he once more embraced her and pressed his face to hers with so
much tenderness that he had to take great heed to keep his tears from
completing the proof of his love and repentance in the sight of all.
Not so Luscinda, and Cardenio, and almost all the others, for they
shed so many tears, some in their own happiness, some at that of the
others, that one would have supposed a heavy calamity had fallen upon
them all. Even Sancho Panza was weeping; though afterwards he said he
only wept because he saw that Dorothea was not as he fancied the queen
Micomicona, of whom he expected such great favours. Their wonder as
well as their weeping lasted some time, and then Cardenio and Luscinda
went and fell on their knees before Don Fernando, returning him thanks
for the favour he had rendered them in language so grateful that he
knew not how to answer them, and raising them up embraced them with
every mark of affection and courtesy. He then asked Dorothea how she
had managed to reach a place so far removed from her own home, and she
in a few fitting words told all that she had previously related to
Cardenio, with which Don Fernando and his companions were so delighted
that they wished the story had been longer; so charmingly did Dorothea
describe her misadventures. When she had finished Don Fernando
recounted what had befallen him in the city after he had found in
Luscinda's bosom the paper in which she declared that she was
Cardenio's wife, and never could be his. He said he meant to kill her,
and would have done so had he not been prevented by her parents, and
that he quitted the house full of rage and shame, and resolved to
avenge himself when a more convenient opportunity should offer. The
next day he learned that Luscinda had disappeared from her father's
house, and that no one could tell whither she had gone. Finally, at
the end of some months he ascertained that she was in a convent and
meant to remain there all the rest of her life, if she were not to
share it with Cardenio; and as soon as he had learned this, taking
these three gentlemen as his companions, he arrived at the place where
she was, but avoided speaking to her, fearing that if it were known he
was there stricter precautions would be taken in the convent; and
watching a time when the porter's lodge was open he left two to guard
the gate, and he and the other entered the convent in quest of
Luscinda, whom they found in the cloisters in conversation with one of
the nuns, and carrying her off without giving her time to resist, they
reached a place with her where they provided themselves with what they
required for taking her away; all which they were able to do in
complete safety, as the convent was in the country at a considerable
distance from the city. He added that when Luscinda found herself in
his power she lost all consciousness, and after returning to herself
did nothing but weep and sigh without speaking a word; and thus in
silence and tears they reached that inn, which for him was reaching
heaven where all the mischances of earth are over and at an end.
CHAPTER XXXVII. IN WHICH IS CONTINUED THE STORY OF THE FAMOUS PRINCESS
MICOMICONA, WITH OTHER DROLL ADVENTURES To all this Sancho listened
with no little sorrow at heart to see how his hopes of dignity were
fading away and vanishing in smoke, and how the fair Princess
Micomicona had turned into Dorothea, and the giant into Don Fernando,
while his master was sleeping tranquilly, totally unconscious of all
that had come to pass. Dorothea was unable to persuade herself that
her present happiness was not all a dream; Cardenio was in a similar
state of mind, and Luscinda's thoughts ran in the same direction. Don
Fernando gave thanks to Heaven for the favour shown to him and for
having been rescued from the intricate labyrinth in which he had been
brought so near the destruction of his good name and of his soul; and
in short everybody in the inn was full of contentment and satisfaction
at the happy issue of such a complicated and hopeless business. The
curate as a sensible man made sound reflections upon the whole affair,
and congratulated each upon his good fortune; but the one that was in
the highest spirits and good humour was the landlady, because of the
promise Cardenio and the curate had given her to pay for all the
losses and damage she had sustained through Don Quixote's means.
Sancho, as has been already said, was the only one who was distressed,
unhappy, and dejected; and so with a long face he went in to his
master, who had just awoke, and said to him: "Sir Rueful Countenance,
your worship may as well sleep on as much as you like, without
troubling yourself about killing any giant or restoring her kingdom to
the princess; for that is all over and settled now." "I should think
it was," replied Don Quixote, "for I have had the most prodigious and
stupendous battle with the giant that I ever remember having had all
the days of my life; and with one back-stroke-swish!--I brought his
head tumbling to the ground, and so much blood gushed forth from him
that it ran in rivulets over the earth like water." "Like red wine,
your worship had better say," replied Sancho; "for I would have you
know, if you don't know it, that the dead giant is a hacked wine-skin,
and the blood four-and-twenty gallons of red wine that it had in its
belly, and the cut-off head is the bitch that bore me; and the devil
take it all." "What art thou talking about, fool?" said Don Quixote;
"art thou in thy senses?" "Let your worship get up," said Sancho, "and
you will see the nice business you have made of it, and what we have
to pay; and you will see the queen turned into a private lady called
Dorothea, and other things that will astonish you, if you understand
them." "I shall not be surprised at anything of the kind," returned
Don Quixote; "for if thou dost remember the last time we were here I
told thee that everything that happened here was a matter of
enchantment, and it would be no wonder if it were the same now." "I
could believe all that," replied Sancho, "if my blanketing was the
same sort of thing also; only it wasn't, but real and genuine; for I
saw the landlord, Who is here to-day, holding one end of the blanket
and jerking me up to the skies very neatly and smartly, and with as
much laughter as strength; and when it comes to be a case of knowing
people, I hold for my part, simple and sinner as I am, that there is
no enchantment about it at all, but a great deal of bruising and bad
luck." "Well, well, God will give a remedy," said Don Quixote; "hand
me my clothes and let me go out, for I want to see these
transformations and things thou speakest of." Sancho fetched him his
clothes; and while he was dressing, the curate gave Don Fernando and
the others present an account of Don Quixote's madness and of the
stratagem they had made use of to withdraw him from that Pena Pobre
where he fancied himself stationed because of his lady's scorn. He
described to them also nearly all the adventures that Sancho had
mentioned, at which they marvelled and laughed not a little, thinking
it, as all did, the strangest form of madness a crazy intellect could
be capable of. But now, the curate said, that the lady Dorothea's good
fortune prevented her from proceeding with their purpose, it would be
necessary to devise or discover some other way of getting him home.
Cardenio proposed to carry out the scheme they had begun, and
suggested that Luscinda would act and support Dorothea's part
sufficiently well. "No," said Don Fernando, "that must not be, for I
want Dorothea to follow out this idea of hers; and if the worthy
gentleman's village is not very far off, I shall be happy if I can do
anything for his relief." "It is not more than two days' journey from
this," said the curate. "Even if it were more," said Don Fernando, "I
would gladly travel so far for the sake of doing so good a work. "At
this moment Don Quixote came out in full panoply, with Mambrino's
helmet, all dinted as it was, on his head, his buckler on his arm, and
leaning on his staff or pike. The strange figure he presented filled
Don Fernando and the rest with amazement as they contemplated his lean
yellow face half a league long, his armour of all sorts, and the
solemnity of his deportment. They stood silent waiting to see what he
would say, and he, fixing his eyes on the air Dorothea, addressed her
with great gravity and composure: "I am informed, fair lady, by my
squire here that your greatness has been annihilated and your being
abolished, since, from a queen and lady of high degree as you used to
be, you have been turned into a private maiden. If this has been done
by the command of the magician king your father, through fear that I
should not afford you the aid you need and are entitled to, I may tell
you he did not know and does not know half the mass, and was little
versed in the annals of chivalry; for, if he had read and gone through
them as attentively and deliberately as I have, he would have found at
every turn that knights of less renown than mine have accomplished
things more difficult: it is no great matter to kill a whelp of a
giant, however arrogant he may be; for it is not many hours since I
myself was engaged with one, and-I will not speak of it, that they may
not say I am lying; time, however, that reveals all, will tell the
tale when we least expect it." "You were engaged with a couple of
wine-skins, and not a giant," said the landlord at this; but Don
Fernando told him to hold his tongue and on no account interrupt Don
Quixote, who continued, "I say in conclusion, high and disinherited
lady, that if your father has brought about this metamorphosis in your
person for the reason I have mentioned, you ought not to attach any
importance to it; for there is no peril on earth through which my
sword will not force a way, and with it, before many days are over, I
will bring your enemy's head to the ground and place on yours the
crown of your kingdom." Don Quixote said no more, and waited for the
reply of the princess, who aware of Don Fernando's determination to
carry on the deception until Don Quixote had been conveyed to his
home, with great ease of manner and gravity made answer, "Whoever told
you, valiant Knight of the Rueful Countenance, that I had undergone
any change or transformation did not tell you the truth, for I am the
same as I was yesterday. It is true that certain strokes of good
fortune, that have given me more than I could have hoped for, have
made some alteration in me; but I have not therefore ceased to be what
I was before, or to entertain the same desire I have had all through
of availing myself of the might of your valiant and invincible arm.
And so, senor, let your goodness reinstate the father that begot me in
your good opinion, and be assured that he was a wise and prudent man,
since by his craft he found out such a sure and easy way of remedying
my misfortune; for I believe, senor, that had it not been for you I
should never have lit upon the good fortune I now possess; and in this
I am saying what is perfectly true; as most of these gentlemen who are
present can fully testify. All that remains is to set out on our
journey to-morrow, for to-day we could not make much way; and for the
rest of the happy result I am looking forward to, I trust to God and
the valour of your heart." So said the sprightly Dorothea, and on
hearing her Don Quixote turned to Sancho, and said to him, with an
angry air, "I declare now, little Sancho, thou art the greatest little
villain in Spain. Say, thief and vagabond, hast thou not just now told
me that this princess had been turned into a maiden called Dorothea,
and that the head which I am persuaded I cut off from a giant was the
bitch that bore thee, and other nonsense that put me in the greatest
perplexity I have ever been in all my life? I vow" (and here he looked
to heaven and ground his teeth) "I have a mind to play the mischief
with thee, in a way that will teach sense for the future to all lying
squires of knights-errant in the world." "Let your worship be calm,
senor," returned Sancho, "for it may well be that I have been mistaken
as to the change of the lady princess Micomicona; but as to the
giant's head, or at least as to the piercing of the wine-skins, and
the blood being red wine, I make no mistake, as sure as there is a
God; because the wounded skins are there at the head of your worship's
bed, and the wine has made a lake of the room; if not you will see
when the eggs come to be fried; I mean when his worship the landlord
calls for all the damages: for the rest, I am heartily glad that her
ladyship the queen is as she was, for it concerns me as much as
anyone." "I tell thee again, Sancho, thou art a fool," said Don
Quixote; "forgive me, and that will do." "That will do," said Don
Fernando; "let us say no more about it; and as her ladyship the
princess proposes to set out to-morrow because it is too late to-day,
so be it, and we will pass the night in pleasant conversation, and
to-morrow we will all accompany Senor Don Quixote; for we wish to
witness the valiant and unparalleled achievements he is about to
perform in the course of this mighty enterprise which he has
undertaken." "It is I who shall wait upon and accompany you," said Don
Quixote; "and I am much gratified by the favour that is bestowed upon
me, and the good opinion entertained of me, which I shall strive to
justify or it shall cost me my life, or even more, if it can possibly
cost me more." Many were the compliments and expressions of politeness
that passed between Don Quixote and Don Fernando; but they were
brought to an end by a traveller who at this moment entered the inn,
and who seemed from his attire to be a Christian lately come from the
country of the Moors, for he was dressed in a short-skirted coat of
blue cloth with half-sleeves and without a collar; his breeches were
also of blue cloth, and his cap of the same colour, and he wore yellow
buskins and had a Moorish cutlass slung from a baldric across his
breast. Behind him, mounted upon an ass, there came a woman dressed in
Moorish fashion, with her face veiled and a scarf on her head, and
wearing a little brocaded cap, and a mantle that covered her from her
shoulders to her feet. The man was of a robust and well-proportioned
frame, in age a little over forty, rather swarthy in complexion, with
long moustaches and a full beard, and, in short, his appearance was
such that if he had been well dressed he would have been taken for a
person of quality and good birth. On entering he asked for a room, and
when they told him there was none in the inn he seemed distressed, and
approaching her who by her dress seemed to be a Moor he her down from
saddle in his arms. Luscinda, Dorothea, the landlady, her daughter and
Maritornes, attracted by the strange, and to them entirely new
costume, gathered round her; and Dorothea, who was always kindly,
courteous, and quick-witted, perceiving that both she and the man who
had brought her were annoyed at not finding a room, said to her, "Do
not be put out, senora, by the discomfort and want of luxuries here,
for it is the way of road-side inns to be without them; still, if you
will be pleased to share our lodging with us (pointing to Luscinda)
perhaps you will have found worse accommodation in the course of your
journey." To this the veiled lady made no reply; all she did was to
rise from her seat, crossing her hands upon her bosom, bowing her head
and bending her body as a sign that she returned thanks. From her
silence they concluded that she must be a Moor and unable to speak a
Christian tongue. At this moment the captive came up, having been
until now otherwise engaged, and seeing that they all stood round his
companion and that she made no reply to what they addressed to her, he
said, "Ladies, this damsel hardly understands my language and can
speak none but that of her own country, for which reason she does not
and cannot answer what has been asked of her." "Nothing has been asked
of her," returned Luscinda; "she has only been offered our company for
this evening and a share of the quarters we occupy, where she shall be
made as comfortable as the circumstances allow, with the good-will we
are bound to show all strangers that stand in need of it, especially
if it be a woman to whom the service is rendered." "On her part and my
own, senora," replied the captive, "I kiss your hands, and I esteem
highly, as I ought, the favour you have offered, which, on such an
occasion and coming from persons of your appearance, is, it is plain
to see, a very great one." "Tell me, senor," said Dorothea, "is this
lady a Christian or a Moor? for her dress and her silence lead us to
imagine that she is what we could wish she was not." "In dress and
outwardly," said he, "she is a Moor, but at heart she is a thoroughly
good Christian, for she has the greatest desire to become one." "Then
she has not been baptised?" returned Luscinda. "There has been no
opportunity for that," replied the captive, "since she left Algiers,
her native country and home; and up to the present she has not found
herself in any such imminent danger of death as to make it necessary
to baptise her before she has been instructed in all the ceremonies
our holy mother Church ordains; but, please God, ere long she shall be
baptised with the solemnity befitting her which is higher than her
dress or mine indicates." By these words he excited a desire in all
who heard him, to know who the Moorish lady and the captive were, but
no one liked to ask just then, seeing that it was a fitter moment for
helping them to rest themselves than for questioning them about their
lives. Dorothea took the Moorish lady by the hand and leading her to a
seat beside herself, requested her to remove her veil. She looked at
the captive as if to ask him what they meant and what she was to do.
He said to her in Arabic that they asked her to take off her veil, and
thereupon she removed it and disclosed a countenance so lovely, that
to Dorothea she seemed more beautiful than Luscinda, and to Luscinda
more beautiful than Dorothea, and all the bystanders felt that if any
beauty could compare with theirs it was the Moorish lady's, and there
were even those who were inclined to give it somewhat the preference.
And as it is the privilege and charm of beauty to win the heart and
secure good-will, all forthwith became eager to show kindness and
attention to the lovely Moor. Don Fernando asked the captive what her
name was, and he replied that it was Lela Zoraida; but the instant she
heard him, she guessed what the Christian had asked, and said hastily,
with some displeasure and energy, "No, not Zoraida; Maria, Maria!"
giving them to understand that she was called "Maria" and not
"Zoraida." These words, and the touching earnestness with which she
uttered them, drew more than one tear from some of the listeners,
particularly the women, who are by nature tender-hearted and
compassionate. Luscinda embraced her affectionately, saying, "Yes,
yes, Maria, Maria," to which the Moor replied, "Yes, yes, Maria;
Zoraida macange," which means "not Zoraida." Night was now
approaching, and by the orders of those who accompanied Don Fernando
the landlord had taken care and pains to prepare for them the best
supper that was in his power. The hour therefore having arrived they
all took their seats at a long table like a refectory one, for round
or square table there was none in the inn, and the seat of honour at
the head of it, though he was for refusing it, they assigned to Don
Quixote, who desired the lady Micomicona to place herself by his side,
as he was her protector. Luscinda and Zoraida took their places next
her, opposite to them were Don Fernando and Cardenio, and next the
captive and the other gentlemen, and by the side of the ladies, the
curate and the barber. And so they supped in high enjoyment, which was
increased when they observed Don Quixote leave off eating, and, moved
by an impulse like that which made him deliver himself at such length
when he supped with the goatherds, begin to address them: "Verily,
gentlemen, if we reflect upon it, great and marvellous are the things
they see, who make profession of the order of knight-errantry. Say,
what being is there in this world, who entering the gate of this
castle at this moment, and seeing us as we are here, would suppose or
imagine us to be what we are? Who would say that this lady who is
beside me was the great queen that we all know her to be, or that I am
that Knight of the Rueful Countenance, trumpeted far and wide by the
mouth of Fame? Now, there can be no doubt that this art and calling
surpasses all those that mankind has invented, and is the more
deserving of being held in honour in proportion as it is the more
exposed to peril. Away with those who assert that letters have the
preeminence over arms; I will tell them, whosoever they may be, that
they know not what they say. For the reason which such persons
commonly assign, and upon which they chiefly rest, is, that the
labours of the mind are greater than those of the body, and that arms
give employment to the body alone; as if the calling were a porter's
trade, for which nothing more is required than sturdy strength; or as
if, in what we who profess them call arms, there were not included
acts of vigour for the execution of which high intelligence is
requisite; or as if the soul of the warrior, when he has an army, or
the defence of a city under his care, did not exert itself as much by
mind as by body. Nay; see whether by bodily strength it be possible to
learn or divine the intentions of the enemy, his plans, stratagems, or
obstacles, or to ward off impending mischief; for all these are the
work of the mind, and in them the body has no share whatever. Since,
therefore, arms have need of the mind, as much as letters, let us see
now which of the two minds, that of the man of letters or that of the
warrior, has most to do; and this will be seen by the end and goal
that each seeks to attain; for that purpose is the more estimable
which has for its aim the nobler object. The end and goal of
letters--I am not speaking now of divine letters, the aim of which is
to raise and direct the soul to Heaven; for with an end so infinite no
other can be compared--I speak of human letters, the end of which is
to establish distributive justice, give to every man that which is
his, and see and take care that good laws are observed: an end
undoubtedly noble, lofty, and deserving of high praise, but not such
as should be given to that sought by arms, which have for their end
and object peace, the greatest boon that men can desire in this life.
The first good news the world and mankind received was that which the
angels announced on the night that was our day, when they sang in the
air, 'Glory to God in the highest, and peace on earth to men of
good-will;' and the salutation which the great Master of heaven and
earth taught his disciples and chosen followers when they entered any
house, was to say, 'Peace be on this house;' and many other times he
said to them, 'My peace I give unto you, my peace I leave you, peace
be with you;' a jewel and a precious gift given and left by such a
hand: a jewel without which there can be no happiness either on earth
or in heaven. This peace is the true end of war; and war is only
another name for arms. This, then, being admitted, that the end of war
is peace, and that so far it has the advantage of the end of letters,
let us turn to the bodily labours of the man of letters, and those of
him who follows the profession of arms, and see which are the
greater." Don Quixote delivered his discourse in such a manner and in
such correct language, that for the time being he made it impossible
for any of his hearers to consider him a madman; on the contrary, as
they were mostly gentlemen, to whom arms are an appurtenance by birth,
they listened to him with great pleasure as he continued: "Here, then,
I say is what the student has to undergo; first of all poverty: not
that all are poor, but to put the case as strongly as possible: and
when I have said that he endures poverty, I think nothing more need be
said about his hard fortune, for he who is poor has no share of the
good things of life. This poverty he suffers from in various ways,
hunger, or cold, or nakedness, or all together; but for all that it is
not so extreme but that he gets something to eat, though it may be at
somewhat unseasonable hours and from the leavings of the rich; for the
greatest misery of the student is what they themselves call 'going out
for soup,' and there is always some neighbour's brazier or hearth for
them, which, if it does not warm, at least tempers the cold to them,
and lastly, they sleep comfortably at night under a roof. I will not
go into other particulars, as for example want of shirts, and no
superabundance of shoes, thin and threadbare garments, and gorging
themselves to surfeit in their voracity when good luck has treated
them to a banquet of some sort. By this road that I have described,
rough and hard, stumbling here, falling there, getting up again to
fall again, they reach the rank they desire, and that once attained,
we have seen many who have passed these Syrtes and Scyllas and
Charybdises, as if borne flying on the wings of favouring fortune; we
have seen them, I say, ruling and governing the world from a chair,
their hunger turned into satiety, their cold into comfort, their
nakedness into fine raiment, their sleep on a mat into repose in
holland and damask, the justly earned reward of their virtue; but,
contrasted and compared with what the warrior undergoes, all they have
undergone falls far short of it, as I am now about to show." CHAPTER
XXXVIII. WHICH TREATS OF THE CURIOUS DISCOURSE DON QUIXOTE DELIVERED
ON ARMS AND LETTERS Continuing his discourse Don Quixote said: "As we
began in the student's case with poverty and its accompaniments, let
us see now if the soldier is richer, and we shall find that in poverty
itself there is no one poorer; for he is dependent on his miserable
pay, which comes late or never, or else on what he can plunder,
seriously imperilling his life and conscience; and sometimes his
nakedness will be so great that a slashed doublet serves him for
uniform and shirt, and in the depth of winter he has to defend himself
against the inclemency of the weather in the open field with nothing
better than the breath of his mouth, which I need not say, coming from
an empty place, must come out cold, contrary to the laws of nature. To
be sure he looks forward to the approach of night to make up for all
these discomforts on the bed that awaits him, which, unless by some
fault of his, never sins by being over narrow, for he can easily
measure out on the ground as he likes, and roll himself about in it to
his heart's content without any fear of the sheets slipping away from
him. Then, after all this, suppose the day and hour for taking his
degree in his calling to have come; suppose the day of battle to have
arrived, when they invest him with the doctor's cap made of lint, to
mend some bullet-hole, perhaps, that has gone through his temples, or
left him with a crippled arm or leg. Or if this does not happen, and
merciful Heaven watches over him and keeps him safe and sound, it may
be he will be in the same poverty he was in before, and he must go
through more engagements and more battles, and come victorious out of
all before he betters himself; but miracles of that sort are seldom
seen. For tell me, sirs, if you have ever reflected upon it, by how
much do those who have gained by war fall short of the number of those
who have perished in it? No doubt you will reply that there can be no
comparison, that the dead cannot be numbered, while the living who
have been rewarded may be summed up with three figures. All which is
the reverse in the case of men of letters; for by skirts, to say
nothing of sleeves, they all find means of support; so that though the
soldier has more to endure, his reward is much less. But against all
this it may be urged that it is easier to reward two thousand
soldiers, for the former may be remunerated by giving them places,
which must perforce be conferred upon men of their calling, while the
latter can only be recompensed out of the very property of the master
they serve; but this impossibility only strengthens my argument.
"Putting this, however, aside, for it is a puzzling question for which
it is difficult to find a solution, let us return to the superiority
of arms over letters, a matter still undecided, so many are the
arguments put forward on each side; for besides those I have
mentioned, letters say that without them arms cannot maintain
themselves, for war, too, has its laws and is governed by them, and
laws belong to the domain of letters and men of letters. To this arms
make answer that without them laws cannot be maintained, for by arms
states are defended, kingdoms preserved, cities protected, roads made
safe, seas cleared of pirates; and, in short, if it were not for them,
states, kingdoms, monarchies, cities, ways by sea and land would be
exposed to the violence and confusion which war brings with it, so
long as it lasts and is free to make use of its privileges and powers.
And then it is plain that whatever costs most is valued and deserves
to be valued most. To attain to eminence in letters costs a man time,
watching, hunger, nakedness, headaches, indigestions, and other things
of the sort, some of which I have already referred to. But for a man
to come in the ordinary course of things to be a good soldier costs
him all the student suffers, and in an incomparably higher degree, for
at every step he runs the risk of losing his life. For what dread of
want or poverty that can reach or harass the student can compare with
what the soldier feels, who finds himself beleaguered in some
stronghold mounting guard in some ravelin or cavalier, knows that the
enemy is pushing a mine towards the post where he is stationed, and
cannot under any circumstances retire or fly from the imminent danger
that threatens him? All he can do is to inform his captain of what is
going on so that he may try to remedy it by a counter-mine, and then
stand his ground in fear and expectation of the moment when he will
fly up to the clouds without wings and descend into the deep against
his will. And if this seems a trifling risk, let us see whether it is
equalled or surpassed by the encounter of two galleys stem to stem, in
the midst of the open sea, locked and entangled one with the other,
when the soldier has no more standing room than two feet of the plank
of the spur; and yet, though he sees before him threatening him as
many ministers of death as there are cannon of the foe pointed at him,
not a lance length from his body, and sees too that with the first
heedless step he will go down to visit the profundities of Neptune's
bosom, still with dauntless heart, urged on by honour that nerves him,
he makes himself a target for all that musketry, and struggles to
cross that narrow path to the enemy's ship. And what is still more
marvellous, no sooner has one gone down into the depths he will never
rise from till the end of the world, than another takes his place; and
if he too falls into the sea that waits for him like an enemy, another
and another will succeed him without a moment's pause between their
deaths: courage and daring the greatest that all the chances of war
can show. Happy the blest ages that knew not the dread fury of those
devilish engines of artillery, whose inventor I am persuaded is in
hell receiving the reward of his diabolical invention, by which he
made it easy for a base and cowardly arm to take the life of a gallant
gentleman; and that, when he knows not how or whence, in the height of
the ardour and enthusiasm that fire and animate brave hearts, there
should come some random bullet, discharged perhaps by one who fled in
terror at the flash when he fired off his accursed machine, which in
an instant puts an end to the projects and cuts off the life of one
who deserved to live for ages to come. And thus when I reflect on
this, I am almost tempted to say that in my heart I repent of having
adopted this profession of knight-errant in so detestable an age as we
live in now; for though no peril can make me fear, still it gives me
some uneasiness to think that powder and lead may rob me of the
opportunity of making myself famous and renowned throughout the known
earth by the might of my arm and the edge of my sword. But Heaven's
will be done; if I succeed in my attempt I shall be all the more
honoured, as I have faced greater dangers than the knights-errant of
yore exposed themselves to." All this lengthy discourse Don Quixote
delivered while the others supped, forgetting to raise a morsel to his
lips, though Sancho more than once told him to eat his supper, as he
would have time enough afterwards to say all he wanted. It excited
fresh pity in those who had heard him to see a man of apparently sound
sense, and with rational views on every subject he discussed, so
hopelessly wanting in all, when his wretched unlucky chivalry was in
question. The curate told him he was quite right in all he had said in
favour of arms, and that he himself, though a man of letters and a
graduate, was of the same opinion. They finished their supper, the
cloth was removed, and while the hostess, her daughter, and Maritornes
were getting Don Quixote of La Mancha's garret ready, in which it was
arranged that the women were to be quartered by themselves for the
night, Don Fernando begged the captive to tell them the story of his
life, for it could not fail to be strange and interesting, to judge by
the hints he had let fall on his arrival in company with Zoraida. To
this the captive replied that he would very willingly yield to his
request, only he feared his tale would not give them as much pleasure
as he wished; nevertheless, not to be wanting in compliance, he would
tell it. The curate and the others thanked him and added their
entreaties, and he finding himself so pressed said there was no
occasion ask, where a command had such weight, and added, "If your
worships will give me your attention you will hear a true story which,
perhaps, fictitious ones constructed with ingenious and studied art
cannot come up to." These words made them settle themselves in their
places and preserve a deep silence, and he seeing them waiting on his
words in mute expectation, began thus in a pleasant quiet voice.
CHAPTER XXXIX. WHEREIN THE CAPTIVE RELATES HIS LIFE AND ADVENTURES My
family had its origin in a village in the mountains of Leon, and
nature had been kinder and more generous to it than fortune; though in
the general poverty of those communities my father passed for being
even a rich man; and he would have been so in reality had he been as
clever in preserving his property as he was in spending it. This
tendency of his to be liberal and profuse he had acquired from having
been a soldier in his youth, for the soldier's life is a school in
which the niggard becomes free-handed and the free-handed prodigal;
and if any soldiers are to be found who are misers, they are monsters
of rare occurrence. My father went beyond liberality and bordered on
prodigality, a disposition by no means advantageous to a married man
who has children to succeed to his name and position. My father had
three, all sons, and all of sufficient age to make choice of a
profession. Finding, then, that he was unable to resist his
propensity, he resolved to divest himself of the instrument and cause
of his prodigality and lavishness, to divest himself of wealth,
without which Alexander himself would have seemed parsimonious; and so
calling us all three aside one day into a room, he addressed us in
words somewhat to the following effect: "My sons, to assure you that I
love you, no more need be known or said than that you are my sons; and
to encourage a suspicion that I do not love you, no more is needed
than the knowledge that I have no self-control as far as preservation
of your patrimony is concerned; therefore, that you may for the future
feel sure that I love you like a father, and have no wish to ruin you
like a stepfather, I propose to do with you what I have for some time
back meditated, and after mature deliberation decided upon. You are
now of an age to choose your line of life or at least make choice of a
calling that will bring you honour and profit when you are older; and
what I have resolved to do is to divide my property into four parts;
three I will give to you, to each his portion without making any
difference, and the other I will retain to live upon and support
myself for whatever remainder of life Heaven may be pleased to grant
me. But I wish each of you on taking possession of the share that
falls to him to follow one of the paths I shall indicate. In this
Spain of ours there is a proverb, to my mind very true--as they all
are, being short aphorisms drawn from long practical experience--and
the one I refer to says, 'The church, or the sea, or the king's
house;' as much as to say, in plainer language, whoever wants to
flourish and become rich, let him follow the church, or go to sea,
adopting commerce as his calling, or go into the king's service in his
household, for they say, 'Better a king's crumb than a lord's favour.'
I say so because it is my will and pleasure that one of you should
follow letters, another trade, and the third serve the king in the
wars, for it is a difficult matter to gain admission to his service in
his household, and if war does not bring much wealth it confers great
distinction and fame. Eight days hence I will give you your full
shares in money, without defrauding you of a farthing, as you will see
in the end. Now tell me if you are willing to follow out my idea and
advice as I have laid it before you." Having called upon me as the
eldest to answer, I, after urging him not to strip himself of his
property but to spend it all as he pleased, for we were young men able
to gain our living, consented to comply with his wishes, and said that
mine were to follow the profession of arms and thereby serve God and
my king. My second brother having made the same proposal, decided upon
going to the Indies, embarking the portion that fell to him in trade.
The youngest, and in my opinion the wisest, said he would rather
follow the church, or go to complete his studies at Salamanca. As soon
as we had come to an understanding, and made choice of our
professions, my father embraced us all, and in the short time he
mentioned carried into effect all he had promised; and when he had
given to each his share, which as well as I remember was three
thousand ducats apiece in cash (for an uncle of ours bought the estate
and paid for it down, not to let it go out of the family), we all
three on the same day took leave of our good father; and at the same
time, as it seemed to me inhuman to leave my father with such scanty
means in his old age, I induced him to take two of my three thousand
ducats, as the remainder would be enough to provide me with all a
soldier needed. My two brothers, moved by my example, gave him each a
thousand ducats, so that there was left for my father four thousand
ducats in money, besides three thousand, the value of the portion that
fell to him which he preferred to retain in land instead of selling
it. Finally, as I said, we took leave of him, and of our uncle whom I
have mentioned, not without sorrow and tears on both sides, they
charging us to let them know whenever an opportunity offered how we
fared, whether well or ill. We promised to do so, and when he had
embraced us and given us his blessing, one set out for Salamanca, the
other for Seville, and I for Alicante, where I had heard there was a
Genoese vessel taking in a cargo of wool for Genoa. It is now some
twenty-two years since I left my father's house, and all that time,
though I have written several letters, I have had no news whatever of
him or of my brothers; my own adventures during that period I will now
relate briefly. I embarked at Alicante, reached Genoa after a
prosperous voyage, and proceeded thence to Milan, where I provided
myself with arms and a few soldier's accoutrements; thence it was my
intention to go and take service in Piedmont, but as I was already on
the road to Alessandria della Paglia, I learned that the great Duke of
Alva was on his way to Flanders. I changed my plans, joined him,
served under him in the campaigns he made, was present at the deaths
of the Counts Egmont and Horn, and was promoted to be ensign under a
famous captain of Guadalajara, Diego de Urbina by name. Some time
after my arrival in Flanders news came of the league that his Holiness
Pope Pius V of happy memory, had made with Venice and Spain against
the common enemy, the Turk, who had just then with his fleet taken the
famous island of Cyprus, which belonged to the Venetians, a loss
deplorable and disastrous. It was known as a fact that the Most Serene
Don John of Austria, natural brother of our good king Don Philip, was
coming as commander-in-chief of the allied forces, and rumours were
abroad of the vast warlike preparations which were being made, all
which stirred my heart and filled me with a longing to take part in
the campaign which was expected; and though I had reason to believe,
and almost certain promises, that on the first opportunity that
presented itself I should be promoted to be captain, I preferred to
leave all and betake myself, as I did, to Italy; and it was my good
fortune that Don John had just arrived at Genoa, and was going on to
Naples to join the Venetian fleet, as he afterwards did at Messina. I
may say, in short, that I took part in that glorious expedition,
promoted by this time to be a captain of infantry, to which honourable
charge my good luck rather than my merits raised me; and that day--so
fortunate for Christendom, because then all the nations of the earth
were disabused of the error under which they lay in imagining the
Turks to be invincible on sea-on that day, I say, on which the Ottoman
pride and arrogance were broken, among all that were there made happy
(for the Christians who died that day were happier than those who
remained alive and victorious) I alone was miserable; for, instead of
some naval crown that I might have expected had it been in Roman
times, on the night that followed that famous day I found myself with
fetters on my feet and manacles on my hands. It happened in this way:
El Uchali, the king of Algiers, a daring and successful corsair,
having attacked and taken the leading Maltese galley (only three
knights being left alive in it, and they badly wounded), the chief
galley of John Andrea, on board of which I and my company were placed,
came to its relief, and doing as was bound to do in such a case, I
leaped on board the enemy's galley, which, sheering off from that
which had attacked it, prevented my men from following me, and so I
found myself alone in the midst of my enemies, who were in such
numbers that I was unable to resist; in short I was taken, covered
with wounds; El Uchali, as you know, sirs, made his escape with his
entire squadron, and I was left a prisoner in his power, the only sad
being among so many filled with joy, and the only captive among so
many free; for there were fifteen thousand Christians, all at the oar
in the Turkish fleet, that regained their longed-for liberty that day.
They carried me to Constantinople, where the Grand Turk, Selim, made
my master general at sea for having done his duty in the battle and
carried off as evidence of his bravery the standard of the Order of
Malta. The following year, which was the year seventy-two, I found
myself at Navarino rowing in the leading galley with the three
lanterns. There I saw and observed how the opportunity of capturing
the whole Turkish fleet in harbour was lost; for all the marines and
janizzaries that belonged to it made sure that they were about to be
attacked inside the very harbour, and had their kits and pasamaques,
or shoes, ready to flee at once on shore without waiting to be
assailed, in so great fear did they stand of our fleet. But Heaven
ordered it otherwise, not for any fault or neglect of the general who
commanded on our side, but for the sins of Christendom, and because it
was God's will and pleasure that we should always have instruments of
punishment to chastise us. As it was, El Uchali took refuge at Modon,
which is an island near Navarino, and landing forces fortified the
mouth of the harbour and waited quietly until Don John retired. On
this expedition was taken the galley called the Prize, whose captain
was a son of the famous corsair Barbarossa. It was taken by the chief
Neapolitan galley called the She-wolf, commanded by that thunderbolt
of war, that father of his men, that successful and unconquered
captain Don Alvaro de Bazan, Marquis of Santa Cruz; and I cannot help
telling you what took place at the capture of the Prize. The son of
Barbarossa was so cruel, and treated his slaves so badly, that, when
those who were at the oars saw that the She-wolf galley was bearing
down upon them and gaining upon them, they all at once dropped their
oars and seized their captain who stood on the stage at the end of the
gangway shouting to them to row lustily; and passing him on from bench
to bench, from the poop to the prow, they so bit him that before he
had got much past the mast his soul had already got to hell; so great,
as I said, was the cruelty with which he treated them, and the hatred
with which they hated him. We returned to Constantinople, and the
following year, seventy-three, it became known that Don John had
seized Tunis and taken the kingdom from the Turks, and placed Muley
Hamet in possession, putting an end to the hopes which Muley Hamida,
the cruelest and bravest Moor in the world, entertained of returning
to reign there. The Grand Turk took the loss greatly to heart, and
with the cunning which all his race possess, he made peace with the
Venetians (who were much more eager for it than he was), and the
following year, seventy-four, he attacked the Goletta and the fort
which Don John had left half built near Tunis. While all these events
were occurring, I was labouring at the oar without any hope of
freedom; at least I had no hope of obtaining it by ransom, for I was
firmly resolved not to write to my father telling him of my
misfortunes. At length the Goletta fell, and the fort fell, before
which places there were seventy-five thousand regular Turkish
soldiers, and more than four hundred thousand Moors and Arabs from all
parts of Africa, and in the train of all this great host such
munitions and engines of war, and so many pioneers that with their
hands they might have covered the Goletta and the fort with handfuls
of earth. The first to fall was the Goletta, until then reckoned
impregnable, and it fell, not by any fault of its defenders, who did
all that they could and should have done, but because experiment
proved how easily entrenchments could be made in the desert sand
there; for water used to be found at two palms depth, while the Turks
found none at two yards; and so by means of a quantity of sandbags
they raised their works so high that they commanded the walls of the
fort, sweeping them as if from a cavalier, so that no one was able to
make a stand or maintain the defence. It was a common opinion that our
men should not have shut themselves up in the Goletta, but should have
waited in the open at the landing-place; but those who say so talk at
random and with little knowledge of such matters; for if in the
Goletta and in the fort there were barely seven thousand soldiers, how
could such a small number, however resolute, sally out and hold their
own against numbers like those of the enemy? And how is it possible to
help losing a stronghold that is not relieved, above all when
surrounded by a host of determined enemies in their own country? But
many thought, and I thought so too, that it was special favour and
mercy which Heaven showed to Spain in permitting the destruction of
that source and hiding place of mischief, that devourer, sponge, and
moth of countless money, fruitlessly wasted there to no other purpose
save preserving the memory of its capture by the invincible Charles V;
as if to make that eternal, as it is and will be, these stones were
needed to support it. The fort also fell; but the Turks had to win it
inch by inch, for the soldiers who defended it fought so gallantly and
stoutly that the number of the enemy killed in twenty-two general
assaults exceeded twenty-five thousand. Of three hundred that remained
alive not one was taken unwounded, a clear and manifest proof of their
gallantry and resolution, and how sturdily they had defended
themselves and held their post. A small fort or tower which was in the
middle of the lagoon under the command of Don Juan Zanoguera, a
Valencian gentleman and a famous soldier, capitulated upon terms. They
took prisoner Don Pedro Puertocarrero, commandant of the Goletta, who
had done all in his power to defend his fortress, and took the loss of
it so much to heart that he died of grief on the way to
Constantinople, where they were carrying him a prisoner. They also
took the commandant of the fort, Gabrio Cerbellon by name, a Milanese
gentleman, a great engineer and a very brave soldier. In these two
fortresses perished many persons of note, among whom was Pagano Doria,
knight of the Order of St. John, a man of generous disposition, as was
shown by his extreme liberality to his brother, the famous John Andrea
Doria; and what made his death the more sad was that he was slain by
some Arabs to whom, seeing that the fort was now lost, he entrusted
himself, and who offered to conduct him in the disguise of a Moor to
Tabarca, a small fort or station on the coast held by the Genoese
employed in the coral fishery. These Arabs cut off his head and
carried it to the commander of the Turkish fleet, who proved on them
the truth of our Castilian proverb, that "though the treason may
please, the traitor is hated;" for they say he ordered those who
brought him the present to be hanged for not having brought him alive.
Among the Christians who were taken in the fort was one named Don
Pedro de Aguilar, a native of some place, I know not what, in
Andalusia, who had been ensign in the fort, a soldier of great repute
and rare intelligence, who had in particular a special gift for what
they call poetry. I say so because his fate brought him to my galley
and to my bench, and made him a slave to the same master; and before
we left the port this gentleman composed two sonnets by way of
epitaphs, one on the Goletta and the other on the fort; indeed, I may
as well repeat them, for I have them by heart, and I think they will
be liked rather than disliked. The instant the captive mentioned the
name of Don Pedro de Aguilar, Don Fernando looked at his companions
and they all three smiled; and when he came to speak of the sonnets
one of them said, "Before your worship proceeds any further I entreat
you to tell me what became of that Don Pedro de Aguilar you have
spoken of." "All I know is," replied the captive, "that after having
been in Constantinople two years, he escaped in the disguise of an
Arnaut, in company with a Greek spy; but whether he regained his
liberty or not I cannot tell, though I fancy he did, because a year
afterwards I saw the Greek at Constantinople, though I was unable to
ask him what the result of the journey was." "Well then, you are
right," returned the gentleman, "for that Don Pedro is my brother, and
he is now in our village in good health, rich, married, and with three
children." "Thanks be to God for all the mercies he has shown him,"
said the captive; "for to my mind there is no happiness on earth to
compare with recovering lost liberty." "And what is more," said the
gentleman, "I know the sonnets my brother made." "Then let your
worship repeat them," said the captive, "for you will recite them
better than I can." "With all my heart," said the gentleman; "that on
the Goletta runs thus." CHAPTER XL. IN WHICH THE STORY OF THE CAPTIVE
IS CONTINUED. SONNET "Blest souls, that, from this mortal husk set
free, In guerdon of brave deeds beatified, Above this lowly orb of
ours abide Made heirs of heaven and immortality, With noble rage and
ardour glowing ye Your strength, while strength was yours, in battle
plied, And with your own blood and the foeman's dyed The sandy soil
and the encircling sea. It was the ebbing life-blood first that failed
The weary arms; the stout hearts never quailed. Though vanquished, yet
ye earned the victor's crown: Though mourned, yet still triumphant was
your fall For there ye won, between the sword and wall, In Heaven
glory and on earth renown." "That is it exactly, according to my
recollection," said the captive. "Well then, that on the fort," said
the gentleman, "if my memory serves me, goes thus: SONNET "Up from
this wasted soil, this shattered shell, Whose walls and towers here in
ruin lie, Three thousand soldier souls took wing on high, In the
bright mansions of the blest to dwell. The onslaught of the foeman to
repel By might of arm all vainly did they try, And when at length
'twas left them but to die, Wearied and few the last defenders fell.
And this same arid soil hath ever been A haunt of countless mournful
memories, As well in our day as in days of yore. But never yet to
Heaven it sent, I ween, From its hard bosom purer souls than these, Or
braver bodies on its surface bore." The sonnets were not disliked, and
the captive was rejoiced at the tidings they gave him of his comrade,
and continuing his tale, he went on to say: The Goletta and the fort
being thus in their hands, the Turks gave orders to dismantle the
Goletta--for the fort was reduced to such a state that there was
nothing left to level--and to do the work more quickly and easily they
mined it in three places; but nowhere were they able to blow up the
part which seemed to be the least strong, that is to say, the old
walls, while all that remained standing of the new fortifications that
the Fratin had made came to the ground with the greatest ease. Finally
the fleet returned victorious and triumphant to Constantinople, and a
few months later died my master, El Uchali, otherwise Uchali Fartax,
which means in Turkish "the scabby renegade;" for that he was; it is
the practice with the Turks to name people from some defect or virtue
they may possess; the reason being that there are among them only four
surnames belonging to families tracing their descent from the Ottoman
house, and the others, as I have said, take their names and surnames
either from bodily blemishes or moral qualities. This "scabby one"
rowed at the oar as a slave of the Grand Signor's for fourteen years,
and when over thirty-four years of age, in resentment at having been
struck by a Turk while at the oar, turned renegade and renounced his
faith in order to be able to revenge himself; and such was his valour
that, without owing his advancement to the base ways and means by
which most favourites of the Grand Signor rise to power, he came to be
king of Algiers, and afterwards general-on-sea, which is the third
place of trust in the realm. He was a Calabrian by birth, and a worthy
man morally, and he treated his slaves with great humanity. He had
three thousand of them, and after his death they were divided, as he
directed by his will, between the Grand Signor (who is heir of all who
die and shares with the children of the deceased) and his renegades. I
fell to the lot of a Venetian renegade who, when a cabin boy on board
a ship, had been taken by Uchali and was so much beloved by him that
he became one of his most favoured youths. He came to be the most
cruel renegade I ever saw: his name was Hassan Aga, and he grew very
rich and became king of Algiers. With him I went there from
Constantinople, rather glad to be so near Spain, not that I intended
to write to anyone about my unhappy lot, but to try if fortune would
be kinder to me in Algiers than in Constantinople, where I had
attempted in a thousand ways to escape without ever finding a
favourable time or chance; but in Algiers I resolved to seek for other
means of effecting the purpose I cherished so dearly; for the hope of
obtaining my liberty never deserted me; and when in my plots and
schemes and attempts the result did not answer my expectations,
without giving way to despair I immediately began to look out for or
conjure up some new hope to support me, however faint or feeble it
might be. In this way I lived on immured in a building or prison
called by the Turks a bano in which they confine the Christian
captives, as well those that are the king's as those belonging to
private individuals, and also what they call those of the Almacen,
which is as much as to say the slaves of the municipality, who serve
the city in the public works and other employments; but captives of
this kind recover their liberty with great difficulty, for, as they
are public property and have no particular master, there is no one
with whom to treat for their ransom, even though they may have the
means. To these banos, as I have said, some private individuals of the
town are in the habit of bringing their captives, especially when they
are to be ransomed; because there they can keep them in safety and
comfort until their ransom arrives. The king's captives also, that are
on ransom, do not go out to work with the rest of the crew, unless
when their ransom is delayed; for then, to make them write for it more
pressingly, they compel them to work and go for wood, which is no
light labour. I, however, was one of those on ransom, for when it was
discovered that I was a captain, although I declared my scanty means
and want of fortune, nothing could dissuade them from including me
among the gentlemen and those waiting to be ransomed. They put a chain
on me, more as a mark of this than to keep me safe, and so I passed my
life in that bano with several other gentlemen and persons of quality
marked out as held to ransom; but though at times, or rather almost
always, we suffered from hunger and scanty clothing, nothing
distressed us so much as hearing and seeing at every turn the
unexampled and unheard-of cruelties my master inflicted upon the
Christians. Every day he hanged a man, impaled one, cut off the ears
of another; and all with so little provocation, or so entirely without
any, that the Turks acknowledged he did it merely for the sake of
doing it, and because he was by nature murderously disposed towards
the whole human race. The only one that fared at all well with him was
a Spanish soldier, something de Saavedra by name, to whom he never
gave a blow himself, or ordered a blow to be given, or addressed a
hard word, although he had done things that will dwell in the memory
of the people there for many a year, and all to recover his liberty;
and for the least of the many things he did we all dreaded that he
would be impaled, and he himself was in fear of it more than once; and
only that time does not allow, I could tell you now something of what
that soldier did, that would interest and astonish you much more than
the narration of my own tale. To go on with my story; the courtyard of
our prison was overlooked by the windows of the house belonging to a
wealthy Moor of high position; and these, as is usual in Moorish
houses, were rather loopholes than windows, and besides were covered
with thick and close lattice-work. It so happened, then, that as I was
one day on the terrace of our prison with three other comrades,
trying, to pass away the time, how far we could leap with our chains,
we being alone, for all the other Christians had gone out to work, I
chanced to raise my eyes, and from one of these little closed windows
I saw a reed appear with a cloth attached to the end of it, and it
kept waving to and fro, and moving as if making signs to us to come
and take it. We watched it, and one of those who were with me went and
stood under the reed to see whether they would let it drop, or what
they would do, but as he did so the reed was raised and moved from
side to side, as if they meant to say "no" by a shake of the head. The
Christian came back, and it was again lowered, making the same
movements as before. Another of my comrades went, and with him the
same happened as with the first, and then the third went forward, but
with the same result as the first and second. Seeing this I did not
like not to try my luck, and as soon as I came under the reed it was
dropped and fell inside the bano at my feet. I hastened to untie the
cloth, in which I perceived a knot, and in this were ten cianis, which
are coins of base gold, current among the Moors, and each worth ten
reals of our money. It is needless to say I rejoiced over this
godsend, and my joy was not less than my wonder as I strove to imagine
how this good fortune could have come to us, but to me specially; for
the evident unwillingness to drop the reed for any but me showed that
it was for me the favour was intended. I took my welcome money, broke
the reed, and returned to the terrace, and looking up at the window, I
saw a very white hand put out that opened and shut very quickly. From
this we gathered or fancied that it must be some woman living in that
house that had done us this kindness, and to show that we were
grateful for it, we made salaams after the fashion of the Moors,
bowing the head, bending the body, and crossing the arms on the
breast. Shortly afterwards at the same window a small cross made of
reeds was put out and immediately withdrawn. This sign led us to
believe that some Christian woman was a captive in the house, and that
it was she who had been so good to us; but the whiteness of the hand
and the bracelets we had perceived made us dismiss that idea, though
we thought it might be one of the Christian renegades whom their
masters very often take as lawful wives, and gladly, for they prefer
them to the women of their own nation. In all our conjectures we were
wide of the truth; so from that time forward our sole occupation was
watching and gazing at the window where the cross had appeared to us,
as if it were our pole-star; but at least fifteen days passed without
our seeing either it or the hand, or any other sign and though
meanwhile we endeavoured with the utmost pains to ascertain who it was
that lived in the house, and whether there were any Christian renegade
in it, nobody could ever tell us anything more than that he who lived
there was a rich Moor of high position, Hadji Morato by name, formerly
alcaide of La Pata, an office of high dignity among them. But when we
least thought it was going to rain any more cianis from that quarter,
we saw the reed suddenly appear with another cloth tied in a larger
knot attached to it, and this at a time when, as on the former
occasion, the bano was deserted and unoccupied. We made trial as
before, each of the same three going forward before I did; but the
reed was delivered to none but me, and on my approach it was let drop.
I untied the knot and I found forty Spanish gold crowns with a paper
written in Arabic, and at the end of the writing there was a large
cross drawn. I kissed the cross, took the crowns and returned to the
terrace, and we all made our salaams; again the hand appeared, I made
signs that I would read the paper, and then the window was closed. We
were all puzzled, though filled with joy at what had taken place; and
as none of us understood Arabic, great was our curiosity to know what
the paper contained, and still greater the difficulty of finding some
one to read it. At last I resolved to confide in a renegade, a native
of Murcia, who professed a very great friendship for me, and had given
pledges that bound him to keep any secret I might entrust to him; for
it is the custom with some renegades, when they intend to return to
Christian territory, to carry about them certificates from captives of
mark testifying, in whatever form they can, that such and such a
renegade is a worthy man who has always shown kindness to Christians,
and is anxious to escape on the first opportunity that may present
itself. Some obtain these testimonials with good intentions, others
put them to a cunning use; for when they go to pillage on Christian
territory, if they chance to be cast away, or taken prisoners, they
produce their certificates and say that from these papers may be seen
the object they came for, which was to remain on Christian ground, and
that it was to this end they joined the Turks in their foray. In this
way they escape the consequences of the first outburst and make their
peace with the Church before it does them any harm, and then when they
have the chance they return to Barbary to become what they were
before. Others, however, there are who procure these papers and make
use of them honestly, and remain on Christian soil. This friend of
mine, then, was one of these renegades that I have described; he had
certificates from all our comrades, in which we testified in his
favour as strongly as we could; and if the Moors had found the papers
they would have burned him alive. I knew that he understood Arabic
very well, and could not only speak but also write it; but before I
disclosed the whole matter to him, I asked him to read for me this
paper which I had found by accident in a hole in my cell. He opened it
and remained some time examining it and muttering to himself as he
translated it. I asked him if he understood it, and he told me he did
perfectly well, and that if I wished him to tell me its meaning word
for word, I must give him pen and ink that he might do it more
satisfactorily. We at once gave him what he required, and he set about
translating it bit by bit, and when he had done he said: "All that is
here in Spanish is what the Moorish paper contains, and you must bear
in mind that when it says 'Lela Marien' it means 'Our Lady the Virgin
Mary.'" We read the paper and it ran thus: "When I was a child my
father had a slave who taught me to pray the Christian prayer in my
own language, and told me many things about Lela Marien. The Christian
died, and I know that she did not go to the fire, but to Allah,
because since then I have seen her twice, and she told me to go to the
land of the Christians to see Lela Marien, who had great love for me.
I know not how to go. I have seen many Christians, but except thyself
none has seemed to me to be a gentleman. I am young and beautiful, and
have plenty of money to take with me. See if thou canst contrive how
we may go, and if thou wilt thou shalt be my husband there, and if
thou wilt not it will not distress me, for Lela Marien will find me
some one to marry me. I myself have written this: have a care to whom
thou givest it to read: trust no Moor, for they are all perfidious. I
am greatly troubled on this account, for I would not have thee confide
in anyone, because if my father knew it he would at once fling me down
a well and cover me with stones. I will put a thread to the reed; tie
the answer to it, and if thou hast no one to write for thee in Arabic,
tell it to me by signs, for Lela Marien will make me understand thee.
She and Allah and this cross, which I often kiss as the captive bade
me, protect thee." Judge, sirs, whether we had reason for surprise and
joy at the words of this paper; and both one and the other were so
great, that the renegade perceived that the paper had not been found
by chance, but had been in reality addressed to some one of us, and he
begged us, if what he suspected were the truth, to trust him and tell
him all, for he would risk his life for our freedom; and so saying he
took out from his breast a metal crucifix, and with many tears swore
by the God the image represented, in whom, sinful and wicked as he
was, he truly and faithfully believed, to be loyal to us and keep
secret whatever we chose to reveal to him; for he thought and almost
foresaw that by means of her who had written that paper, he and all of
us would obtain our liberty, and he himself obtain the object he so
much desired, his restoration to the bosom of the Holy Mother Church,
from which by his own sin and ignorance he was now severed like a
corrupt limb. The renegade said this with so many tears and such signs
of repentance, that with one consent we all agreed to tell him the
whole truth of the matter, and so we gave him a full account of all,
without hiding anything from him. We pointed out to him the window at
which the reed appeared, and he by that means took note of the house,
and resolved to ascertain with particular care who lived in it. We
agreed also that it would be advisable to answer the Moorish lady's
letter, and the renegade without a moment's delay took down the words
I dictated to him, which were exactly what I shall tell you, for
nothing of importance that took place in this affair has escaped my
memory, or ever will while life lasts. This, then, was the answer
returned to the Moorish lady: "The true Allah protect thee, Lady, and
that blessed Marien who is the true mother of God, and who has put it
into thy heart to go to the land of the Christians to see Lela Marien,
who had great love for me. I know not how to go. I have seen many
Christians, but except thyself none has seemed to me to be a
gentleman. I am young and beautiful, and have plenty of money to take
with me. See if thou canst contrive how we may go, and if thou wilt
thou shalt be my husband there, and if thou wilt not it will not
distress me, for Lela Marien will find me some one to marry me. I
myself have written this: have a care to whom thou givest it to read:
trust no Moor, for they are all perfidious. I am greatly troubled on
this account, for I would not have thee confide in anyone, because if
my father knew it he would at once fling me down a well and cover me
with stones. I will put a thread to the reed; tie the answer to it,
and if thou hast no one to write for thee in Arabic, tell it to me by
signs, for Lela Marien will make me understand thee. She and Allah and
this cross, which I often kiss as the captive bade me, protect thee."
Judge, sirs, whether we had reason for surprise and joy at the words
of this paper; and both one and the other were so great, that the
renegade perceived that the paper had not been found by chance, but
had been in reality addressed to some one of us, and he begged us, if
what he suspected were the truth, to trust him and tell him all, for
he would risk his life for our freedom; and so saying he took out from
his breast a metal crucifix, and with many tears swore by the God the
image represented, in whom, sinful and wicked as he was, he truly and
faithfully believed, to be loyal to us and keep secret whatever we
chose to reveal to him; for he thought and almost foresaw that by
means of her who had written that paper, he and all of us would obtain
our liberty, and he himself obtain the object he so much desired, his
restoration to the bosom of the Holy Mother Church, from which by his
own sin and ignorance he was now severed like a corrupt limb. The
renegade said this with so many tears and such signs of repentance,
that with one consent we all agreed to tell him the whole truth of the
matter, and so we gave him a full account of all, without hiding
anything from him. We pointed out to him the window at which the reed
appeared, and he by that means took note of the house, and resolved to
ascertain with particular care who lived in it. We agreed also that it
would be advisable to answer the Moorish lady's letter, and the
renegade without a moment's delay took down the words I dictated to
him, which were exactly what I shall tell you, for nothing of
importance that took place in this affair has escaped my memory, or
ever will while life lasts. This, then, was the answer returned to the
Moorish lady: "The true Allah protect thee, Lady, and that blessed
Marien who is the true mother of God, and who has put it into thy
heart to go to the land of the Christians, because she loves thee.
Entreat her that she be pleased to show thee how thou canst execute
the command she gives thee, for she will, such is her goodness. On my
own part, and on that of all these Christians who are with me, I
promise to do all that we can for thee, even to death. Fail not to
write to me and inform me what thou dost mean to do, and I will always
answer thee; for the great Allah has given us a Christian captive who
can speak and write thy language well, as thou mayest see by this
paper; without fear, therefore, thou canst inform us of all thou
wouldst. As to what thou sayest, that if thou dost reach the land of
the Christians thou wilt be my wife, I give thee my promise upon it as
a good Christian; and know that the Christians keep their promises
better than the Moors. Allah and Marien his mother watch over thee, my
Lady." The paper being written and folded I waited two days until the
bano was empty as before, and immediately repaired to the usual walk
on the terrace to see if there were any sign of the reed, which was
not long in making its appearance. As soon as I saw it, although I
could not distinguish who put it out, I showed the paper as a sign to
attach the thread, but it was already fixed to the reed, and to it I
tied the paper; and shortly afterwards our star once more made its
appearance with the white flag of peace, the little bundle. It was
dropped, and I picked it up, and found in the cloth, in gold and
silver coins of all sorts, more than fifty crowns, which fifty times
more strengthened our joy and doubled our hope of gaining our liberty.
That very night our renegade returned and said he had learned that the
Moor we had been told of lived in that house, that his name was Hadji
Morato, that he was enormously rich, that he had one only daughter the
heiress of all his wealth, and that it was the general opinion
throughout the city that she was the most beautiful woman in Barbary,
and that several of the viceroys who came there had sought her for a
wife, but that she had been always unwilling to marry; and he had
learned, moreover, that she had a Christian slave who was now dead;
all which agreed with the contents of the paper. We immediately took
counsel with the renegade as to what means would have to be adopted in
order to carry off the Moorish lady and bring us all to Christian
territory; and in the end it was agreed that for the present we should
wait for a second communication from Zoraida (for that was the name of
her who now desires to be called Maria), because we saw clearly that
she and no one else could find a way out of all these difficulties.
When we had decided upon this the renegade told us not to be uneasy,
for he would lose his life or restore us to liberty. For four days the
bano was filled with people, for which reason the reed delayed its
appearance for four days, but at the end of that time, when the bano
was, as it generally was, empty, it appeared with the cloth so bulky
that it promised a happy birth. Reed and cloth came down to me, and I
found another paper and a hundred crowns in gold, without any other
coin. The renegade was present, and in our cell we gave him the paper
to read, which was to this effect: "I cannot think of a plan, senor,
for our going to Spain, nor has Lela Marien shown me one, though I
have asked her. All that can be done is for me to give you plenty of
money in gold from this window. With it ransom yourself and your
friends, and let one of you go to the land of the Christians, because
she loves thee. Entreat her that she be pleased to show thee how thou
canst execute the command she gives thee, for she will, such is her
goodness. On my own part, and on that of all these Christians who are
with me, I promise to do all that we can for thee, even to death. Fail
not to write to me and inform me what thou dost mean to do, and I will
always answer thee; for the great Allah has given us a Christian
captive who can speak and write thy language well, as thou mayest see
by this paper; without fear, therefore, thou canst inform us of all
thou wouldst. As to what thou sayest, that if thou dost reach the land
of the Christians thou wilt be my wife, I give thee my promise upon it
as a good Christian; and know that the Christians keep their promises
better than the Moors. Allah and Marien his mother watch over thee, my
Lady." The paper being written and folded I waited two days until the
bano was empty as before, and immediately repaired to the usual walk
on the terrace to see if there were any sign of the reed, which was
not long in making its appearance. As soon as I saw it, although I
could not distinguish who put it out, I showed the paper as a sign to
attach the thread, but it was already fixed to the reed, and to it I
tied the paper; and shortly afterwards our star once more made its
appearance with the white flag of peace, the little bundle. It was
dropped, and I picked it up, and found in the cloth, in gold and
silver coins of all sorts, more than fifty crowns, which fifty times
more strengthened our joy and doubled our hope of gaining our liberty.
That very night our renegade returned and said he had learned that the
Moor we had been told of lived in that house, that his name was Hadji
Morato, that he was enormously rich, that he had one only daughter the
heiress of all his wealth, and that it was the general opinion
throughout the city that she was the most beautiful woman in Barbary,
and that several of the viceroys who came there had sought her for a
wife, but that she had been always unwilling to marry; and he had
learned, moreover, that she had a Christian slave who was now dead;
all which agreed with the contents of the paper. We immediately took
counsel with the renegade as to what means would have to be adopted in
order to carry off the Moorish lady and bring us all to Christian
territory; and in the end it was agreed that for the present we should
wait for a second communication from Zoraida (for that was the name of
her who now desires to be called Maria), because we saw clearly that
she and no one else could find a way out of all these difficulties.
When we had decided upon this the renegade told us not to be uneasy,
for he would lose his life or restore us to liberty. For four days the
bano was filled with people, for which reason the reed delayed its
appearance for four days, but at the end of that time, when the bano
was, as it generally was, empty, it appeared with the cloth so bulky
that it promised a happy birth. Reed and cloth came down to me, and I
found another paper and a hundred crowns in gold, without any other
coin. The renegade was present, and in our cell we gave him the paper
to read, which was to this effect: "I cannot think of a plan, senor,
for our going to Spain, nor has Lela Marien shown me one, though I
have asked her. All that can be done is for me to give you plenty of
money in gold from this window. With it ransom yourself and your
friends, and let one of you go to the land of the Christians, because
she loves thee. Entreat her that she be pleased to show thee how thou
canst execute the command she gives thee, for she will, such is her
goodness. On my own part, and on that of all these Christians who are
with me, I promise to do all that we can for thee, even to death. Fail
not to write to me and inform me what thou dost mean to do, and I will
always answer thee; for the great Allah has given us a Christian
captive who can speak and write thy language well, as thou mayest see
by this paper; without fear, therefore, thou canst inform us of all
thou wouldst. As to what thou sayest, that if thou dost reach the land
of the Christians thou wilt be my wife, I give thee my promise upon it
as a good Christian; and know that the Christians keep their promises
better than the Moors. Allah and Marien his mother watch over thee, my
Lady." The paper being written and folded I waited two days until the
bano was empty as before, and immediately repaired to the usual walk
on the terrace to see if there were any sign of the reed, which was
not long in making its appearance. As soon as I saw it, although I
could not distinguish who put it out, I showed the paper as a sign to
attach the thread, but it was already fixed to the reed, and to it I
tied the paper; and shortly afterwards our star once more made its
appearance with the white flag of peace, the little bundle. It was
dropped, and I picked it up, and found in the cloth, in gold and
silver coins of all sorts, more than fifty crowns, which fifty times
more strengthened our joy and doubled our hope of gaining our liberty.
That very night our renegade returned and said he had learned that the
Moor we had been told of lived in that house, that his name was Hadji
Morato, that he was enormously rich, that he had one only daughter the
heiress of all his wealth, and that it was the general opinion
throughout the city that she was the most beautiful woman in Barbary,
and that several of the viceroys who came there had sought her for a
wife, but that she had been always unwilling to marry; and he had
learned, moreover, that she had a Christian slave who was now dead;
all which agreed with the contents of the paper. We immediately took
counsel with the renegade as to what means would have to be adopted in
order to carry off the Moorish lady and bring us all to Christian
territory; and in the end it was agreed that for the present we should
wait for a second communication from Zoraida (for that was the name of
her who now desires to be called Maria), because we saw clearly that
she and no one else could find a way out of all these difficulties.
When we had decided upon this the renegade told us not to be uneasy,
for he would lose his life or restore us to liberty. For four days the
bano was filled with people, for which reason the reed delayed its
appearance for four days, but at the end of that time, when the bano
was, as it generally was, empty, it appeared with the cloth so bulky
that it promised a happy birth. Reed and cloth came down to me, and I
found another paper and a hundred crowns in gold, without any other
coin. The renegade was present, and in our cell we gave him the paper
to read, which was to this effect: "I cannot think of a plan, senor,
for our going to Spain, nor has Lela Marien shown me one, though I
have asked her. All that can be done is for me to give you plenty of
money in gold from this window. With it ransom yourself and your
friends, and let one of you go to the land of the Christians, and
there buy a vessel and come back for the others; and he will find me
in my father's garden, which is at the Babazon gate near the seashore,
where I shall be all this summer with my father and my servants. You
can carry me away from there by night without any danger, and bring me
to the vessel. And remember thou art to be my husband, else I will
pray to Marien to punish thee. If thou canst not trust anyone to go
for the vessel, ransom thyself and do thou go, for I know thou wilt
return more surely than any other, as thou art a gentleman and a
Christian. Endeavour to make thyself acquainted with the garden; and
when I see thee walking yonder I shall know that the bano is empty and
I will give thee abundance of money. Allah protect thee, senor." These
were the words and contents of the second paper, and on hearing them,
each declared himself willing to be the ransomed one, and promised to
go and return with scrupulous good faith; and I too made the same
offer; but to all this the renegade objected, saying that he would not
on any account consent to one being set free before all went together,
as experience had taught him how ill those who have been set free keep
promises which they made in captivity; for captives of distinction
frequently had recourse to this plan, paying the ransom of one who was
to go to Valencia or Majorca with money to enable him to arm a bark
and return for the others who had ransomed him, but who never came
back; for recovered liberty and the dread of losing it again efface
from the memory all the obligations in the world. And to prove the
truth of what he said, he told us briefly what had happened to a
certain Christian gentleman almost at that very time, the strangest
case that had ever occurred even there, where astonishing and
marvellous things are happening every instant. In short, he ended by
saying that what could and ought to be done was to give the money
intended for the ransom of one of us Christians to him, so that he
might with it buy a vessel there in Algiers under the pretence of
becoming a merchant and trader at Tetuan and along the coast; and when
master of the vessel, it would be easy for him to hit on some way of
getting us all out of the bano and putting us on board; especially if
the Moorish lady gave, as she said, money enough to ransom all,
because once free it would be the easiest thing in the world for us to
embark even in open day; but the greatest difficulty was that the
Moors do not allow any renegade to buy or own any craft, unless it be
a large vessel for going on roving expeditions, because they are
afraid that anyone who buys a small vessel, especially if he be a
Spaniard, only wants it for the purpose of escaping to Christian
territory. This however he could get over by arranging with a Tagarin
Moor to go shares with him in the purchase of the vessel, and in the
profit on the cargo; and under cover of this he could become master of
the vessel, in which case he looked upon all the rest as accomplished.
But though to me and my comrades it had seemed a better plan to send
to Majorca for the vessel, as the Moorish lady suggested, we did not
dare to oppose him, fearing that if we did not do as he said he would
denounce us, and place us in danger of losing all our lives if he were
to disclose our dealings with Zoraida, for whose life we would have
all given our own. We therefore resolved to put ourselves in the hands
of God and in the renegade's; and at the same time an answer was given
to Zoraida, telling her that we would do all she recommended, for she
had given as good advice as if Lela Marien had delivered it, and that
it depended on her alone whether we were to defer the business or put
it in execution at once. I renewed my promise to be her husband; and
thus the next day that the bano chanced to be empty she at different
times gave us by means of the reed and cloth two thousand gold crowns
and a paper in which she said that the next Juma, that is to say
Friday, she was going to her father's garden, but that before she went
she would give us more money; and if it were not enough we were to let
her know, as she would give us as much as we asked, for her father had
so much he would not miss it, and besides she kept all the keys. We at
once gave the renegade five hundred crowns to buy the vessel, and with
eight hundred I ransomed myself, giving the money to a Valencian
merchant who happened to be in Algiers at the time, and who had me
released on his word, pledging it that on the arrival of the first
ship from Valencia he would pay my ransom; for if he had given the
money at once it would have made the king suspect that my ransom money
had been for a long time in Algiers, and that the merchant had for his
own advantage kept it secret. In fact my master was so difficult to
deal with that I dared not on any account pay down the money at once.
The Thursday before the Friday on which the fair Zoraida was to go to
the garden she gave us a thousand crowns more, and warned us of her
departure, begging me, if I were ransomed, to find out her father's
garden at once, and by all means to seek an opportunity of going there
to see her. I answered in a few words that I would do so, and that she
must remember to commend us to Lela Marien with all the prayers the
captive had taught her. This having been done, steps were taken to
ransom our three comrades, so as to enable them to quit the bano, and
lest, seeing me ransomed and themselves not, though the money was
forthcoming, they should make a disturbance about it and the devil
should prompt them to do something that might injure Zoraida; for
though their position might be sufficient to relieve me from this
apprehension, nevertheless I was unwilling to run any risk in the
matter; and so I had them ransomed in the same way as I was, handing
over all the money to the merchant so that he might with safety and
confidence give security; without, however, confiding our arrangement
and secret to him, which might have been dangerous. CHAPTER XLI. IN
WHICH THE CAPTIVE STILL CONTINUES HIS ADVENTURES Before fifteen days
were over our renegade had already purchased an excellent vessel with
room for more than thirty persons; and to make the transaction safe
and lend a colour to it, he thought it well to make, as he did, a
voyage to a place called Shershel, twenty leagues from Algiers on the
Oran side, where there is an extensive trade in dried figs. Two or
three times he made this voyage in company with the Tagarin already
mentioned. The Moors of Aragon are called Tagarins in Barbary, and
those of Granada Mudejars; but in the Kingdom of Fez they call the
Mudejars Elches, and they are the people the king chiefly employs in
war. To proceed: every time he passed with his vessel he anchored in a
cove that was not two crossbow shots from the garden where Zoraida was
waiting; and there the renegade, together with the two Moorish lads
that rowed, used purposely to station himself, either going through
his prayers, or else practising as a part what he meant to perform in
earnest. And thus he would go to Zoraida's garden and ask for fruit,
which her father gave him, not knowing him; but though, as he
afterwards told me, he sought to speak to Zoraida, and tell her who he
was, and that by my orders he was to take her to the land of the
Christians, so that she might feel satisfied and easy, he had never
been able to do so; for the Moorish women do not allow themselves to
be seen by any Moor or Turk, unless their husband or father bid them:
with Christian captives they permit freedom of intercourse and
communication, even more than might be considered proper. But for my
part I should have been sorry if he had spoken to her, for perhaps it
might have alarmed her to find her affairs talked of by renegades. But
God, who ordered it otherwise, afforded no opportunity for our
renegade's well-meant purpose; and he, seeing how safely he could go
to Shershel and return, and anchor when and how and where he liked,
and that the Tagarin his partner had no will but his, and that, now I
was ransomed, all we wanted was to find some Christians to row, told
me to look out for any I should be willing to take with me, over and
above those who had been ransomed, and to engage them for the next
Friday, which he fixed upon for our departure. On this I spoke to
twelve Spaniards, all stout rowers, and such as could most easily
leave the city; but it was no easy matter to find so many just then,
because there were twenty ships out on a cruise and they had taken all
the rowers with them; and these would not have been found were it not
that their master remained at home that summer without going to sea in
order to finish a galliot that he had upon the stocks. To these men I
said nothing more than that the next Friday in the evening they were
to come out stealthily one by one and hang about Hadji Morato's
garden, waiting for me there until I came. These directions I gave
each one separately, with orders that if they saw any other Christians
there they were not to say anything to them except that I had directed
them to wait at that spot. This preliminary having been settled,
another still more necessary step had to be taken, which was to let
Zoraida know how matters stood that she might be prepared and
forewarned, so as not to be taken by surprise if we were suddenly to
seize upon her before she thought the Christians' vessel could have
returned. I determined, therefore, to go to the garden and try if I
could speak to her; and the day before my departure I went there under
the pretence of gathering herbs. The first person I met was her
father, who addressed me in the language that all over Barbary and
even in Constantinople is the medium between captives and Moors, and
is neither Morisco nor Castilian, nor of any other nation, but a
mixture of all languages, by means of which we can all understand one
another. In this sort of language, I say, he asked me what I wanted in
his garden, and to whom I belonged. I replied that I was a slave of
the Arnaut Mami (for I knew as a certainty that he was a very great
friend of his), and that I wanted some herbs to make a salad. He asked
me then whether I were on ransom or not, and what my master demanded
for me. While these questions and answers were proceeding, the fair
Zoraida, who had already perceived me some time before, came out of
the house in the garden, and as Moorish women are by no means
particular about letting themselves be seen by Christians, or, as I
have said before, at all coy, she had no hesitation in coming to where
her father stood with me; moreover her father, seeing her approaching
slowly, called to her to come. It would be beyond my power now to
describe to you the great beauty, the high-bred air, the brilliant
attire of my beloved Zoraida as she presented herself before my eyes.
I will content myself with saying that more pearls hung from her fair
neck, her ears, and her hair than she had hairs on her head. On her
ankles, which as is customary were bare, she had carcajes (for so
bracelets or anklets are called in Morisco) of the purest gold, set
with so many diamonds that she told me afterwards her father valued
them at ten thousand doubloons, and those she had on her wrists were
worth as much more. The pearls were in profusion and very fine, for
the highest display and adornment of the Moorish women is decking
themselves with rich pearls and seed-pearls; and of these there are
therefore more among the Moors than among any other people. Zoraida's
father had to the reputation of possessing a great number, and the
purest in all Algiers, and of possessing also more than two hundred
thousand Spanish crowns; and she, who is now mistress of me only, was
mistress of all this. Whether thus adorned she would have been
beautiful or not, and what she must have been in her prosperity, may
be imagined from the beauty remaining to her after so many hardships;
for, as everyone knows, the beauty of some women has its times and its
seasons, and is increased or diminished by chance causes; and
naturally the emotions of the mind will heighten or impair it, though
indeed more frequently they totally destroy it. In a word she
presented herself before me that day attired with the utmost
splendour, and supremely beautiful; at any rate, she seemed to me the
most beautiful object I had ever seen; and when, besides, I thought of
all I owed to her I felt as though I had before me some heavenly being
come to earth to bring me relief and happiness. As she approached her
father told her in his own language that I was a captive belonging to
his friend the Arnaut Mami, and that I had come for salad. She took up
the conversation, and in that mixture of tongues I have spoken of she
asked me if I was a gentleman, and why I was not ransomed. I answered
that I was already ransomed, and that by the price it might be seen
what value my master set on me, as I had given one thousand five
hundred zoltanis for me; to which she replied, "Hadst thou been my
father's, I can tell thee, I would not have let him part with thee for
twice as much, for you Christians always tell lies about yourselves
and make yourselves out poor to cheat the Moors." "That may be, lady,"
said I; "but indeed I dealt truthfully with my master, as I do and
mean to do with everybody in the world." "And when dost thou go?" said
Zoraida. "To-morrow, I think," said I, "for there is a vessel here
from France which sails to-morrow, and I think I shall go in her."
"Would it not be better," said Zoraida, "to wait for the arrival of
ships from Spain and go with them and not with the French who are not
your friends?" "No," said I; "though if there were intelligence that a
vessel were now coming from Spain it is true I might, perhaps, wait
for it; however, it is more likely I shall depart to-morrow, for the
longing I feel to return to my country and to those I love is so great
that it will not allow me to wait for another opportunity, however
more convenient, if it be delayed." "No doubt thou art married in
thine own country," said Zoraida, "and for that reason thou art
anxious to go and see thy wife." "I am not married," I replied, "but I
have given my promise to marry on my arrival there." "And is the lady
beautiful to whom thou hast given it?" said Zoraida. "So beautiful,"
said I, "that, to describe her worthily and tell thee the truth, she
is very like thee." At this her father laughed very heartily and said,
"By Allah, Christian, she must be very beautiful if she is like my
daughter, who is the most beautiful woman in all this kingdom: only
look at her well and thou wilt see I am telling the truth." Zoraida's
father as the better linguist helped to interpret most of these words
and phrases, for though she spoke the bastard language, that, as I
have said, is employed there, she expressed her meaning more by signs
than by words. While we were still engaged in this conversation, a
Moor came running up, exclaiming that four Turks had leaped over the
fence or wall of the garden, and were gathering the fruit though it
was not yet ripe. The old man was alarmed and Zoraida too, for the
Moors commonly, and, so to speak, instinctively have a dread of the
Turks, but particularly of the soldiers, who are so insolent and
domineering to the Moors who are under their power that they treat
them worse than if they were their slaves. Her father said to Zoraida,
"Daughter, retire into the house and shut thyself in while I go and
speak to these dogs; and thou, Christian, pick thy herbs, and go in
peace, and Allah bring thee safe to thy own country." I bowed, and he
went away to look for the Turks, leaving me alone with Zoraida, who
made as if she were about to retire as her father bade her; but the
moment he was concealed by the trees of the garden, turning to me with
her eyes full of tears she said, "Tameji, cristiano, tameji?" that is
to say, "Art thou going, Christian, art thou going?" I made answer,
"Yes, lady, but not without thee, come what may: be on the watch for
me on the next Juma, and be not alarmed when thou seest us; for most
surely we shall go to the land of the Christians." This I said in such
a way that she understood perfectly all that passed between us, and
throwing her arm round my neck she began with feeble steps to move
towards the house; but as fate would have it (and it might have been
very unfortunate if Heaven had not otherwise ordered it), just as we
were moving on in the manner and position I have described, with her
arm round my neck, her father, as he returned after having sent away
the Turks, saw how we were walking and we perceived that he saw us;
but Zoraida, ready and quickwitted, took care not to remove her arm
from my neck, but on the contrary drew closer to me and laid her head
on my breast, bending her knees a little and showing all the signs and
tokens of fainting, while I at the same time made it seem as though I
were supporting her against my will. Her father came running up to
where we were, and seeing his daughter in this state asked what was
the matter with her; she, however, giving no answer, he said, "No
doubt she has fainted in alarm at the entrance of those dogs," and
taking her from mine he drew her to his own breast, while she sighing,
her eyes still wet with tears, said again, "Ameji, cristiano,
ameji"--"Go, Christian, go." To this her father replied, "There is no
need, daughter, for the Christian to go, for he has done thee no harm,
and the Turks have now gone; feel no alarm, there is nothing to hurt
thee, for as I say, the Turks at my request have gone back the way
they came." "It was they who terrified her, as thou hast said, senor,"
said I to her father; "but since she tells me to go, I have no wish to
displease her: peace be with thee, and with thy leave I will come back
to this garden for herbs if need be, for my master says there are
nowhere better herbs for salad then here." "Come back for any thou
hast need of," replied Hadji Morato; "for my daughter does not speak
thus because she is displeased with thee or any Christian: she only
meant that the Turks should go, not thou; or that it was time for thee
to look for thy herbs." With this I at once took my leave of both; and
she, looking as though her heart were breaking, retired with her
father. While pretending to look for herbs I made the round of the
garden at my ease, and studied carefully all the approaches and
outlets, and the fastenings of the house and everything that could be
taken advantage of to make our task easy. Having done so I went and
gave an account of all that had taken place to the renegade and my
comrades, and looked forward with impatience to the hour when, all
fear at an end, I should find myself in possession of the prize which
fortune held out to me in the fair and lovely Zoraida. The time passed
at length, and the appointed day we so longed for arrived; and, all
following out the arrangement and plan which, after careful
consideration and many a long discussion, we had decided upon, we
succeeded as fully as we could have wished; for on the Friday
following the day upon which I spoke to Zoraida in the garden, the
renegade anchored his vessel at nightfall almost opposite the spot
where she was. The Christians who were to row were ready and in hiding
in different places round about, all waiting for me, anxious and
elated, and eager to attack the vessel they had before their eyes; for
they did not know the renegade's plan, but expected that they were to
gain their liberty by force of arms and by killing the Moors who were
on board the vessel. As soon, then, as I and my comrades made our
appearance, all those that were in hiding seeing us came and joined
us. It was now the time when the city gates are shut, and there was no
one to be seen in all the space outside. When we were collected
together we debated whether it would be better first to go for
Zoraida, or to make prisoners of the Moorish rowers who rowed in the
vessel; but while we were still uncertain our renegade came up asking
us what kept us, as it was now the time, and all the Moors were off
their guard and most of them asleep. We told him why we hesitated, but
he said it was of more importance first to secure the vessel, which
could be done with the greatest ease and without any danger, and then
we could go for Zoraida. We all approved of what he said, and so
without further delay, guided by him we made for the vessel, and he
leaping on board first, drew his cutlass and said in Morisco, "Let no
one stir from this if he does not want it to cost him his life." By
this almost all the Christians were on board, and the Moors, who were
fainthearted, hearing their captain speak in this way, were cowed, and
without any one of them taking to his arms (and indeed they had few or
hardly any) they submitted without saying a word to be bound by the
Christians, who quickly secured them, threatening them that if they
raised any kind of outcry they would be all put to the sword. This
having been accomplished, and half of our party being left to keep
guard over them, the rest of us, again taking the renegade as our
guide, hastened towards Hadji Morato's garden, and as good luck would
have it, on trying the gate it opened as easily as if it had not been
locked; and so, quite quietly and in silence, we reached the house
without being perceived by anybody. The lovely Zoraida was watching
for us at a window, and as soon as she perceived that there were
people there, she asked in a low voice if we were "Nizarani," as much
as to say or ask if we were Christians. I answered that we were, and
begged her to come down. As soon as she recognised me she did not
delay an instant, but without answering a word came down immediately,
opened the door and presented herself before us all, so beautiful and
so richly attired that I cannot attempt to describe her. The moment I
saw her I took her hand and kissed it, and the renegade and my two
comrades did the same; and the rest, who knew nothing of the
circumstances, did as they saw us do, for it only seemed as if we were
returning thanks to her, and recognising her as the giver of our
liberty. The renegade asked her in the Morisco language if her father
was in the house. She replied that he was and that he was asleep.
"Then it will be necessary to waken him and take him with us," said
the renegade, "and everything of value in this fair mansion." "Nay,"
said she, "my father must not on any account be touched, and there is
nothing in the house except what I shall take, and that will be quite
enough to enrich and satisfy all of you; wait a little and you shall
see," and so saying she went in, telling us she would return
immediately and bidding us keep quiet making any noise. I asked the
renegade what had passed between them, and when he told me, I declared
that nothing should be done except in accordance with the wishes of
Zoraida, who now came back with a little trunk so full of gold crowns
that she could scarcely carry it. Unfortunately her father awoke while
this was going on, and hearing a noise in the garden, came to the
window, and at once perceiving that all those who were there were
Christians, raising a prodigiously loud outcry, he began to call out
in Arabic, "Christians, Christians! thieves, thieves!" by which cries
we were all thrown into the greatest fear and embarrassment; but the
renegade seeing the danger we were in and how important it was for him
to effect his purpose before we were heard, mounted with the utmost
quickness to where Hadji Morato was, and with him went some of our
party; I, however, did not dare to leave Zoraida, who had fallen
almost fainting in my arms. To be brief, those who had gone upstairs
acted so promptly that in an instant they came down, carrying Hadji
Morato with his hands bound and a napkin tied over his mouth, which
prevented him from uttering a word, warning him at the same time that
to attempt to speak would cost him his life. When his daughter caught
sight of him she covered her eyes so as not to see him, and her father
was horror-stricken, not knowing how willingly she had placed herself
in our hands. But it was now most essential for us to be on the move,
and carefully and quickly we regained the vessel, where those who had
remained on board were waiting for us in apprehension of some mishap
having befallen us. It was barely two hours after night set in when we
were all on board the vessel, where the cords were removed from the
hands of Zoraida's father, and the napkin from his mouth; but the
renegade once more told him not to utter a word, or they would take
his life. He, when he saw his daughter there, began to sigh piteously,
and still more when he perceived that I held her closely embraced and
that she lay quiet without resisting or complaining, or showing any
reluctance; nevertheless he remained silent lest they should carry
into effect the repeated threats the renegade had addressed to him.
Finding herself now on board, and that we were about to give way with
the oars, Zoraida, seeing her father there, and the other Moors bound,
bade the renegade ask me to do her the favour of releasing the Moors
and setting her father at liberty, for she would rather drown herself
in the sea than suffer a father that had loved her so dearly to be
carried away captive before her eyes and on her account. The renegade
repeated this to me, and I replied that I was very willing to do so;
but he replied that it was not advisable, because if they were left
there they would at once raise the country and stir up the city, and
lead to the despatch of swift cruisers in pursuit, and our being
taken, by sea or land, without any possibility of escape; and that all
that could be done was to set them free on the first Christian ground
we reached. On this point we all agreed; and Zoraida, to whom it was
explained, together with the reasons that prevented us from doing at
once what she desired, was satisfied likewise; and then in glad
silence and with cheerful alacrity each of our stout rowers took his
oar, and commending ourselves to God with all our hearts, we began to
shape our course for the island of Majorca, the nearest Christian
land. Owing, however, to the Tramontana rising a little, and the sea
growing somewhat rough, it was impossible for us to keep a straight
course for Majorca, and we were compelled to coast in the direction of
Oran, not without great uneasiness on our part lest we should be
observed from the town of Shershel, which lies on that coast, not more
than sixty miles from Algiers. Moreover we were afraid of meeting on
that course one of the galliots that usually come with goods from
Tetuan; although each of us for himself and all of us together felt
confident that, if we were to meet a merchant galliot, so that it were
not a cruiser, not only should we not be lost, but that we should take
a vessel in which we could more safely accomplish our voyage. As we
pursued our course Zoraida kept her head between my hands so as not to
see her father, and I felt that she was praying to Lela Marien to help
us. We might have made about thirty miles when daybreak found us some
three musket-shots off the land, which seemed to us deserted, and
without anyone to see us. For all that, however, by hard rowing we put
out a little to sea, for it was now somewhat calmer, and having gained
about two leagues the word was given to row by batches, while we ate
something, for the vessel was well provided; but the rowers said it
was not a time to take any rest; let food be served out to those who
were not rowing, but they would not leave their oars on any account.
This was done, but now a stiff breeze began to blow, which obliged us
to leave off rowing and make sail at once and steer for Oran, as it
was impossible to make any other course. All this was done very
promptly, and under sail we ran more than eight miles an hour without
any fear, except that of coming across some vessel out on a roving
expedition. We gave the Moorish rowers some food, and the renegade
comforted them by telling them that they were not held as captives, as
we should set them free on the first opportunity. The same was said to
Zoraida's father, who replied, "Anything else, Christian, I might hope
for or think likely from your generosity and good behaviour, but do
not think me so simple as to imagine you will give me my liberty; for
you would have never exposed yourselves to the danger of depriving me
of it only to restore it to me so generously, especially as you know
who I am and the sum you may expect to receive on restoring it; and if
you will only name that, I here offer you all you require for myself
and for my unhappy daughter there; or else for her alone, for she is
the greatest and most precious part of my soul." As he said this he
began to weep so bitterly that he filled us all with compassion and
forced Zoraida to look at him, and when she saw him weeping she was so
moved that she rose from my feet and ran to throw her arms round him,
and pressing her face to his, they both gave way to such an outburst
of tears that several of us were constrained to keep them company. But
when her father saw her in full dress and with all her jewels about
her, he said to her in his own language, "What means this, my
daughter? Last night, before this terrible misfortune in which we are
plunged befell us, I saw thee in thy everyday and indoor garments; and
now, without having had time to attire thyself, and without my
bringing thee any joyful tidings to furnish an occasion for adorning
and bedecking thyself, I see thee arrayed in the finest attire it
would be in my power to give thee when fortune was most kind to us.
Answer me this; for it causes me greater anxiety and surprise than
even this misfortune itself." The renegade interpreted to us what the
Moor said to his daughter; she, however, returned him no answer. But
when he observed in one corner of the vessel the little trunk in which
she used to keep her jewels, which he well knew he had left in Algiers
and had not brought to the garden, he was still more amazed, and asked
her how that trunk had come into our hands, and what there was in it.
To which the renegade, without waiting for Zoraida to reply, made
answer, "Do not trouble thyself by asking thy daughter Zoraida so many
questions, senor, for the one answer I will give thee will serve for
all; I would have thee know that she is a Christian, and that it is
she who has been the file for our chains and our deliverer from
captivity. She is here of her own free will, as glad, I imagine, to
find herself in this position as he who escapes from darkness into the
light, from death to life, and from suffering to glory." "Daughter, is
this true, what he says?" cried the Moor. "It is," replied Zoraida.
"That thou art in truth a Christian," said the old man, "and that thou
hast given thy father into the power of his enemies?" To which Zoraida
made answer, "A Christian I am, but it is not I who have placed thee
in this position, for it never was my wish to leave thee or do thee
harm, but only to do good to myself." "And what good hast thou done
thyself, daughter?" said he. "Ask thou that," said she, "of Lela
Marien, for she can tell thee better than I." The Moor had hardly
heard these words when with marvellous quickness he flung himself
headforemost into the sea, where no doubt he would have been drowned
had not the long and full dress he wore held him up for a little on
the surface of the water. Zoraida cried aloud to us to save him, and
we all hastened to help, and seizing him by his robe we drew him in
half drowned and insensible, at which Zoraida was in such distress
that she wept over him as piteously and bitterly as though he were
already dead. We turned him upon his face and he voided a great
quantity of water, and at the end of two hours came to himself.
Meanwhile, the wind having changed we were compelled to head for the
land, and ply our oars to avoid being driven on shore; but it was our
good fortune to reach a creek that lies on one side of a small
promontory or cape, called by the Moors that of the "Cava rumia,"
which in our language means "the wicked Christian woman;" for it is a
tradition among them that La Cava, through whom Spain was lost, lies
buried at that spot; "cava" in their language meaning "wicked woman,"
and "rumia" "Christian;" moreover, they count it unlucky to anchor
there when necessity compels them, and they never do so otherwise. For
us, however, it was not the resting-place of the wicked woman but a
haven of safety for our relief, so much had the sea now got up. We
posted a look-out on shore, and never let the oars out of our hands,
and ate of the stores the renegade had laid in, imploring God and Our
Lady with all our hearts to help and protect us, that we might give a
happy ending to a beginning so prosperous. At the entreaty of Zoraida
orders were given to set on shore her father and the other Moors who
were still bound, for she could not endure, nor could her tender heart
bear to see her father in bonds and her fellow-countrymen prisoners
before her eyes. We promised her to do this at the moment of
departure, for as it was uninhabited we ran no risk in releasing them
at that place. Our prayers were not so far in vain as to be unheard by
Heaven, for after a while the wind changed in our favour, and made the
sea calm, inviting us once more to resume our voyage with a good
heart. Seeing this we unbound the Moors, and one by one put them on
shore, at which they were filled with amazement; but when we came to
land Zoraida's father, who had now completely recovered his senses, he
said: "Why is it, think ye, Christians, that this wicked woman is
rejoiced at your giving me my liberty? Think ye it is because of the
affection she bears me? Nay verily, it is only because of the
hindrance my presence offers to the execution of her base designs. And
think not that it is her belief that yours is better than ours that
has led her to change her religion; it is only because she knows that
immodesty is more freely practised in your country than in ours." Then
turning to Zoraida, while I and another of the Christians held him
fast by both arms, lest he should do some mad act, he said to her,
"Infamous girl, misguided maiden, whither in thy blindness and madness
art thou going in the hands of these dogs, our natural enemies? Cursed
be the hour when I begot thee! Cursed the luxury and indulgence in
which I reared thee!" But seeing that he was not likely soon to cease
I made haste to put him on shore, and thence he continued his
maledictions and lamentations aloud; calling on Mohammed to pray to
Allah to destroy us, to confound us, to make an end of us; and when,
in consequence of having made sail, we could no longer hear what he
said we could see what he did; how he plucked out his beard and tore
his hair and lay writhing on the ground. But once he raised his voice
to such a pitch that we were able to hear what he said. "Come back,
dear daughter, come back to shore; I forgive thee all; let those men
have the money, for it is theirs now, and come back to comfort thy
sorrowing father, who will yield up his life on this barren strand if
thou dost leave him." All this Zoraida heard, and heard with sorrow
and tears, and all she could say in answer was, "Allah grant that Lela
Marien, who has made me become a Christian, give thee comfort in thy
sorrow, my father. Allah knows that I could not do otherwise than I
have done, and that these Christians owe nothing to my will; for even
had I wished not to accompany them, but remain at home, it would have
been impossible for me, so eagerly did my soul urge me on to the
accomplishment of this purpose, which I feel to be as righteous as to
thee, dear father, it seems wicked." But neither could her father hear
her nor we see him when she said this; and so, while I consoled
Zoraida, we turned our attention to our voyage, in which a breeze from
the right point so favoured us that we made sure of finding ourselves
off the coast of Spain on the morrow by daybreak. But, as good seldom
or never comes pure and unmixed, without being attended or followed by
some disturbing evil that gives a shock to it, our fortune, or perhaps
the curses which the Moor had hurled at his daughter (for whatever
kind of father they may come from these are always to be dreaded),
brought it about that when we were now in mid-sea, and the night about
three hours spent, as we were running with all sail set and oars
lashed, for the favouring breeze saved us the trouble of using them,
we saw by the light of the moon, which then was in its full splendour,
that some one was calling to him from the hole in the wall, which
seemed to him to be a window, and what is more, with a gilt grating,
as rich castles, such as he believed the inn to be, ought to have; and
it immediately suggested itself to his imagination that, as on the
former occasion, the fair damsel, the daughter of the lady of the
castle, overcome by love for him, was once more endeavouring to win
his affections; and with this idea, not to show himself discourteous,
or ungrateful, he turned Rocinante's head and approached the hole, and
as he perceived the two wenches he said: "I pity you, beauteous lady,
that you should have directed your thoughts of love to a quarter from
whence it is impossible that such a return can be made to you as is
due to your great merit and gentle birth, for which you must not blame
this unhappy knight-errant whom love renders incapable of submission
to any other than her whom, the first moment his eyes beheld her, he
made absolute mistress of his soul. Forgive me, noble lady, and retire
to your apartment, and do not, by any further declaration of your
passion, compel me to show myself more ungrateful; and if, of the love
you bear me, you should find that there is anything else in my power
wherein I can gratify you, provided it be not love itself, demand it
of me; for I swear to you by that sweet absent enemy of mine to grant
it this instant, though it be that you require of me a lock of
Medusa's hair, which was all snakes, or even the very beams of the sun
shut up in a vial." "My mistress wants nothing of that sort, sir
knight," said Maritornes at this. "What then, discreet dame, is it
that your mistress wants?" replied Don Quixote. "Only one of your fair
hands," said Maritornes, "to enable her to vent over it the great
passion passion which has brought her to this loophole, so much to the
risk of her honour; for if the lord her father had heard her, the
least slice he would cut off her would be her ear." "I should like to
see that tried," said Don Quixote; "but he had better beware of that,
if he does not want to meet the most disastrous end that ever father
in the world met for having laid hands on the tender limbs of a
love-stricken daughter." Maritornes felt sure that Don Quixote would
present the hand she had asked, and making up her mind what to do, she
got down from the hole and went into the stable, where she took the
halter of Sancho Panza's ass, and in all haste returned to the hole,
just as Don Quixote had planted himself standing on Rocinante's saddle
in order to reach the grated window where he supposed the lovelorn
damsel to be; and giving her his hand, he said, "Lady, take this hand,
or rather this scourge of the evil-doers of the earth; take, I say,
this hand which no other hand of woman has ever touched, not even hers
who has complete possession of my entire body. I present it to you,
not that you may kiss it, but that you may observe the contexture of
the sinews, the close network of the muscles, the breadth and capacity
of the veins, whence you may infer what must be the strength of the
arm that has such a hand." "That we shall see presently," said
Maritornes, and making a running knot on the halter, she passed it
over his wrist and coming down from the hole tied the other end very
firmly to the bolt of the door of the straw-loft. Don Quixote, feeling
the roughness of the rope on his wrist, exclaimed, "Your grace seems
to be grating rather than caressing my hand; treat it not so harshly,
for it is not to blame for the offence my resolution has given you,
nor is it just to wreak all your vengeance on so small a part;
remember that one who loves so well should not revenge herself so
cruelly." But there was nobody now to listen to these words of Don
Quixote's, for as soon as Maritornes had tied him she and the other
made off, ready to die with laughing, leaving him fastened in such a
way that it was impossible for him to release himself. He was, as has
been said, standing on Rocinante, with his arm passed through the hole
and his wrist tied to the bolt of the door, and in mighty fear and
dread of being left hanging by the arm if Rocinante were to stir one
side or the other; so he did not dare to make the least movement,
although from the patience and imperturbable disposition of Rocinante,
he had good reason to expect that he would stand without budging for a
whole century. Finding himself fast, then, and that the ladies had
retired, he began to fancy that all this was done by enchantment, as
on the former occasion when in that same castle that enchanted Moor of
a carrier had belaboured him; and he cursed in his heart his own want
of sense and judgment in venturing to enter the castle again, after
having come off so badly the first time; it being a settled point with
knights-errant that when they have tried an adventure, and have not
succeeded in it, it is a sign that it is not reserved for them but for
others, and that therefore they need not try it again. Nevertheless he
pulled his arm to see if he could release himself, but it had been
made so fast that all his efforts were in vain. It is true he pulled
it gently lest Rocinante should move, but try as he might to seat
himself in the saddle, he had nothing for it but to stand upright or
pull his hand off. Then it was he wished for the sword of Amadis,
against which no enchantment whatever had any power; then he cursed
his ill fortune; then he magnified the loss the world would sustain by
his absence while he remained there enchanted, for that he believed he
was beyond all doubt; then he once more took to thinking of his
beloved Dulcinea del Toboso; then he called to his worthy squire
Sancho Panza, who, buried in sleep and stretched upon the pack-saddle
of his ass, was oblivious, at that moment, of the mother that bore
him; then he called upon the sages Lirgandeo and Alquife to come to
his aid; then he invoked his good friend Urganda to succour him; and
then, at last, morning found him in such a state of desperation and
perplexity that he was bellowing like a bull, for he had no hope that
day would bring any relief to his suffering, which he believed would
last for ever, inasmuch as he was enchanted; and of this he was
convinced by seeing that Rocinante never stirred, much or little, and
he felt persuaded that he and his horse were to remain in this state,
without eating or drinking or sleeping, until the malign influence of
the stars was overpast, or until some other more sage enchanter should
disenchant him. But he was very much deceived in this conclusion, for
daylight had hardly begun to appear when there came up to the inn four
men on horseback, well equipped and accoutred, with firelocks across
their saddle-bows. They called out and knocked loudly at the gate of
the inn, which was still shut; on seeing which, Don Quixote, even
there where he was, did not forget to act as sentinel, and said in a
loud and imperious tone, "Knights, or squires, or whatever ye be, ye
have no right to knock at the gates of this castle; for it is plain
enough that they who are within are either asleep, or else are not in
the habit of throwing open the fortress until the sun's rays are
spread over the whole surface of the earth. Withdraw to a distance,
and wait till it is broad daylight, and then we shall see whether it
will be proper or not to open to you." "What the devil fortress or
castle is this," said one, "to make us stand on such ceremony? If you
are the innkeeper bid them open to us; we are travellers who only want
to feed our horses and go on, for we are in haste." "Do you think,
gentlemen, that I look like an innkeeper?" said Don Quixote. "I don't
know what you look like," replied the other; "but I know that you are
talking nonsense when you call this inn a castle." "A castle it is,"
returned Don Quixote, "nay, more, one of the best in this whole
province, and it has within it people who have had the sceptre in the
hand and the crown on the head." "It would be better if it were the
other way," said the traveller, "the sceptre on the head and the crown
in the hand; but if so, may be there is within some company of
players, with whom it is a common thing to have those crowns and
sceptres you speak of; for in such a small inn as this, and where such
silence is kept, I do not believe any people entitled to crowns and
sceptres can have taken up their quarters." "You know but little of
the world," returned Don Quixote, "since you are ignorant of what
commonly occurs in knight-errantry." But the comrades of the
spokesman, growing weary of the dialogue with Don Quixote, renewed
their knocks with great vehemence, so much so that the host, and not
only he but everybody in the inn, awoke, and he got up to ask who
knocked. It happened at this moment that one of the horses of the four
who were seeking admittance went to smell Rocinante, who melancholy,
dejected, and with drooping ears stood motionless, supporting his
sorely stretched master; and as he was, after all, flesh, though he
looked as if he were made of wood, he could not help giving way and in
return smelling the one who had come to offer him attentions. But he
had hardly moved at all when Don Quixote lost his footing; and
slipping off the saddle, he would have come to the ground, but for
being suspended by the arm, which caused him such agony that he
believed either his wrist would be cut through or his arm torn off;
and he hung so near the ground that he could just touch it with his
feet, which was all the worse for him; for, finding how little was
wanted to enable him to plant his feet firmly, he struggled and
stretched himself as much as he could to gain a footing; just like
those undergoing the torture of the strappado, when they are fixed at
"touch and no touch," who aggravate their own sufferings by their
violent efforts to stretch themselves, deceived by the hope which
makes them fancy that with a very little more they will reach the
ground. CHAPTER XLIV. IN WHICH ARE CONTINUED THE UNHEARD-OF ADVENTURES
OF THE INN So loud, in fact, were the shouts of Don Quixote, that the
landlord opening the gate of the inn in all haste, came out in dismay,
and ran to see who was uttering such cries, and those who were outside
joined him. Maritornes, who had been by this time roused up by the
same outcry, suspecting what it was, ran to the loft and, without
anyone seeing her, untied the halter by which Don Quixote was
suspended, and down he came to the ground in the sight of the landlord
and the travellers, who approaching asked him what was the matter with
him that he shouted so. He without replying a word took the rope off
his wrist, and rising to his feet leaped upon Rocinante, braced his
buckler on his arm, and with his hand on his sword exclaimed, "O Lady
of Beauty, strength and support of my faint heart, it is time for thee
to turn the eyes of thy greatness on this thy captive knight on the
brink of so mighty an adventure." By this he felt himself so inspired
that he would not have flinched if all the carriers in the world had
assailed him. The comrades of the wounded perceiving the plight they
were in began from a distance to shower stones on Don Quixote, who
screened himself as best he could with his buckler, not daring to quit
the trough and leave his armour unprotected. The landlord shouted to
them to leave him alone, for he had already told them that he was mad,
and as a madman he would not be accountable even if he killed them
all. Still louder shouted Don Quixote, calling them knaves and
traitors, and the lord of the castle, who allowed knights-errant to be
treated in this fashion, a villain and a low-born knight whom, had he
received the order of knighthood, he would call to account for his
treachery. "But of you," he cried, "base and vile rabble, I make no
account; fling, strike, come on, do all ye can against me, ye shall
see what the reward of your folly and insolence will be." This he
uttered with so much spirit and boldness that he filled his assailants
with a terrible fear, and as much for this reason as at the persuasion
of the landlord they left off stoning him, and he allowed them to
carry off the wounded, and with the same calmness and composure as
before resumed the watch over his armour. But these freaks of his
guest were not much to the liking of the landlord, so he determined to
cut matters short and confer upon him at once the unlucky order of
knighthood before any further misadventure could occur; so, going up
to him, he apologised for the rudeness which, without his knowledge,
had been offered to him by these low people, who, however, had been
well punished for their audacity. As he had already told him, he said,
there was no chapel in the castle, nor was it needed for what remained
to be done, for, as he understood the ceremonial of the order, the
whole point of being dubbed a knight lay in the accolade and in the
slap on the shoulder, and that could be administered in the middle of
a field; and that he had now done all that was needful as to watching
the armour, for all requirements were satisfied by a watch of two
hours only, while he had been more than four about it. Don Quixote
believed it all, and told him he stood there ready to obey him, and to
make an end of it with as much despatch as possible; for, if he were
again attacked, and felt himself to be dubbed knight, he would not, he
thought, leave a soul alive in the castle, except such as out of
respect he might spare at his bidding. Thus warned and menaced, the
castellan forthwith brought out a book in which he used to enter the
straw and barley he served out to the carriers, and, with a lad
carrying a candle-end, and the two damsels already mentioned, he
returned to where Don Quixote stood, and bade him kneel down. Then,
reading from his account-book as if he were repeating some devout
prayer, in the middle of his delivery he raised his hand and gave him
a sturdy blow on the neck, and then, with his own sword, a smart slap
on the shoulder, all the while muttering between his teeth as if he
was saying his prayers. Having done this, he directed one of the
ladies to gird on his sword, which she did with great self-possession
and gravity, and not a little was required to prevent a burst of
laughter at each stage of the ceremony; but what they had already seen
of the novice knight's prowess kept their laughter within bounds. On
girding him with the sword the worthy lady said to him, "May God make
your worship a very fortunate knight, and grant you success in
battle." Don Quixote asked her name in order that he might from that
time forward know to whom he was beholden for the favour he had
received, as he meant to confer upon her some portion of the honour he
acquired by the might of his arm. She answered with great humility
that she was called La Tolosa, and that she was the daughter of a
respectable miller of Antequera; and of her likewise Don Quixote
requested that she would adopt the "Don" and call herself Dona
Molinera, making offers to her further services and favours. Having
thus, with hot haste and speed, brought to a conclusion these
never-till-now-seen ceremonies, Don Quixote was on thorns until he saw
himself on horseback sallying forth in quest of adventures; and
saddling Rocinante at once he mounted, and embracing his host, as he
returned thanks for his kindness in knighting him, he addressed him in
language so extraordinary that it is impossible to convey an idea of
it or report it. The landlord, to get him out of the inn, replied with
no less rhetoric though with shorter words, and without calling upon
him to pay the reckoning let him go with a Godspeed. CHAPTER IV. OF
WHAT HAPPENED TO OUR KNIGHT WHEN HE LEFT THE INN Day was dawning when
Don Quixote quitted the inn, so happy, so gay, so exhilarated at
finding himself now dubbed a knight, that his joy was like to burst
his horse-girths. However, recalling the advice of his host as to the
requisites he ought to carry with him, especially that referring to
money and shirts, he determined to go home and provide himself with
all, and also with a squire, for he reckoned upon securing a
farm-labourer, a neighbour of his, a poor man with a family, but very
well qualified for the office of squire to a knight. With this object
he turned his horse's head towards his village, and Rocinante, thus
reminded of his old quarters, stepped out so briskly that he hardly
seemed to tread the earth. He had not gone far, when out of a thicket
on his right there seemed to come feeble cries as of some one in
distress, and the instant he heard them he exclaimed, "Thanks be to
heaven for the favour it accords me, that it so soon offers me an
opportunity of fulfilling the obligation I have undertaken, and
gathering the fruit of my ambition. These cries, no doubt, come from
some man or woman in want of help, and needing my aid and protection;"
and wheeling, he turned Rocinante in the direction whence the cries
seemed to proceed. He had gone but a few paces into the wood, when he
saw a mare tied to an oak, and tied to another, and stripped from the
waist upwards, a youth of about fifteen years of age, from whom the
cries came. Nor were they without cause, for a lusty farmer was
flogging him with a belt and following up every blow with scoldings
and commands, repeating, "Your mouth shut and your eyes open!" while
the youth made answer, "I won't do it again, master mine; by God's
passion I won't do it again, and I'll take more care of the flock
another time." Seeing what was going on, Don Quixote said in an angry
voice, "Discourteous knight, it ill becomes you to assail one who
cannot defend himself; mount your steed and take your lance" (for
there was a lance leaning against the oak to which the mare was tied),
"and I will make you know that you are behaving as a coward." The
farmer, seeing before him this figure in full armour brandishing a
lance over his head, gave himself up for dead, and made answer meekly,
"Sir Knight, this youth that I am chastising is my servant, employed
by me to watch a flock of sheep that I have hard by, and he is so
careless that I lose one every day, and when I punish him for his
carelessness and knavery he says I do it out of niggardliness, to
escape paying him the wages I owe him, and before God, and on my soul,
he lies." "Lies before me, base clown!" said Don Quixote. "By the sun
that shines on us I have a mind to run you through with this lance.
Pay him at once without another word; if not, by the God that rules us
I will make an end of you, and annihilate you on the spot; release him
instantly." The farmer hung his head, and without a word untied his
servant, of whom Don Quixote asked how much his master owed him. He
replied, nine months at seven reals a month. Don Quixote added it up,
found that it came to sixty-three reals, and told the farmer to pay it
down immediately, if he did not want to die for it. The trembling
clown replied that as he lived and by the oath he had sworn (though he
had not sworn any) it was not so much; for there were to be taken into
account and deducted three pairs of shoes he had given him, and a real
for two blood-lettings when he was sick. "All that is very well," said
Don Quixote; "but let the shoes and the blood-lettings stand as a
setoff against the blows you have given him without any cause; for if
he spoiled the leather of the shoes you paid for, you have damaged
that of his body, and if the barber took blood from him when he was
sick, you have drawn it when he was sound; so on that score he owes
you nothing." "The difficulty is, Sir Knight, that I have no money
here; let Andres come home with me, and I will pay him all, real by
real." "I go with him!" said the youth. "Nay, God forbid! No, senor,
not for the world; for once alone with me, he would ray me like a
Saint Bartholomew." "He will do nothing of the kind," said Don
Quixote; "I have only to command, and he will obey me; and as he has
sworn to me by the order of knighthood which he has received, I leave
him free, and I guarantee the payment." "Consider what you are saying,
senor," said the youth; "this master of mine is not a knight, nor has
he received any order of knighthood; for he is Juan Haldudo the Rich,
of Quintanar." "That matters little," replied Don Quixote; "there may
be Haldudos knights; moreover, everyone is the son of his works."
"That is true," said Andres; "but this master of mine--of what works
is he the son, when he refuses me the wages of my sweat and labour?"
"I do not refuse, brother Andres," said the farmer, "be good enough to
come along with me, and I swear by all the orders of knighthood there
are in the world to pay you as I have agreed, real by real, and
perfumed." "For the perfumery I excuse you," said Don Quixote; "give
it to him in reals, and I shall be satisfied; and see that you do as
you have sworn; if not, by the same oath I swear to come back and hunt
you out and punish you; and I shall find you though you should lie
closer than a lizard. And if you desire to know who it is lays this
command upon you, that you be more firmly bound to obey it, know that
I am the valorous Don Quixote of La Mancha, the undoer of injustice,
the righter of wrongs, the protector of damsels, the terror of giants,
and the winner of battles?" "That," said the goatherd, "sounds like
what one reads in the books of the knights-errant, who did all that
you say this man does; though it is my belief that either you are
joking, or else this gentleman has empty lodgings in his head." "You
are a great scoundrel," said Don Quixote, "and it is you who are empty
and a fool. I am fuller than ever was the whoreson bitch that bore
you;" and passing from words to deeds, he caught up a loaf that was
near him and sent it full in the goatherd's face, with such force that
he flattened his nose; but the goatherd, who did not understand jokes,
and found himself roughly handled in such good earnest, paying no
respect to carpet, tablecloth, or diners, sprang upon Don Quixote, and
seizing him by the throat with both hands would no doubt have
throttled him, had not Sancho Panza that instant come to the rescue,
and grasping him by the shoulders flung him down on the table,
smashing plates, breaking glasses, and upsetting and scattering
everything on it. Don Quixote, finding himself free, strove to get on
top of the goatherd, who, with his face covered with blood, and
soundly kicked by Sancho, was on all fours feeling about for one of
the table-knives to take a bloody revenge with. The canon and the
curate, however, prevented him, but the barber so contrived it that he
got Don Quixote under him, and rained down upon him such a shower of
fisticuffs that the poor knight's face streamed with blood as freely
as his own. The canon and the curate were bursting with laughter, the
officers were capering with delight, and both the one and the other
hissed them on as they do dogs that are worrying one another in a
fight. Sancho alone was frantic, for he could not free himself from
the grasp of one of the canon's servants, who kept him from going to
his master's assistance. At last, while they were all, with the
exception of the two bruisers who were mauling each other, in high
glee and enjoyment, they heard a trumpet sound a note so doleful that
it made them all look in the direction whence the sound seemed to
come. But the one that was most excited by hearing it was Don Quixote,
who though sorely against his will he was under the goatherd, and
something more than pretty well pummelled, said to him, "Brother devil
(for it is impossible but that thou must be one since thou hast had
might and strength enough to overcome mine), I ask thee to agree to a
truce for but one hour for the solemn note of yonder trumpet that
falls on our ears seems to me to summon me to some new adventure." The
goatherd, who was by this time tired of pummelling and being
pummelled, released him at once, and Don Quixote rising to his feet
and turning his eyes to the quarter where the sound had been heard,
suddenly saw coming down the slope of a hill several men clad in white
like penitents. The fact was that the clouds had that year withheld
their moisture from the earth, and in all the villages of the district
they were organising processions, rogations, and penances, imploring
God to open the hands of his mercy and send the rain; and to this end
the people of a village that was hard by were going in procession to a
holy hermitage there was on one side of that valley. Don Quixote when
he saw the strange garb of the penitents, without reflecting how often
he had seen it before, took it into his head that this was a case of
adventure, and that it fell to him alone as a knight-errant to engage
in it; and he was all the more confirmed in this notion, by the idea
that an image draped in black they had with them was some illustrious
lady that these villains and discourteous thieves were carrying off by
force. As soon as this occurred to him he ran with all speed to
Rocinante who was grazing at large, and taking the bridle and the
buckler from the saddle-bow, he had him bridled in an instant, and
calling to Sancho for his sword he mounted Rocinante, braced his
buckler on his arm, put his lance in rest, and making a considerable
circuit of the plain came back at a half-gallop exclaiming: "Whoever
shall say that I have been enchanted with just cause, provided my lady
the Princess Micomicona grants me permission to do so, I give him the
lie, challenge him and defy him to single combat." The newly arrived
travellers were amazed at the words of Don Quixote; but the landlord
removed their surprise by telling them who he was, and not to mind him
as he was out of his senses. They then asked the landlord if by any
chance a youth of about fifteen years of age had come to that inn, one
dressed like a muleteer, and of such and such an appearance,
describing that of Dona Clara's lover. The landlord replied that there
were so many people in the inn he had not noticed the person they were
inquiring for; but one of them observing the coach in which the Judge
had come, said, "He is here no doubt, for this is the coach he is
following: let one of us stay at the gate, and the rest go in to look
for him; or indeed it would be as well if one of us went round the
inn, lest he should escape over the wall of the yard." "So be it,"
said another; and while two of them went in, one remained at the gate
and the other made the circuit of the inn; observing all which, the
landlord was unable to conjecture for what reason they were taking all
these precautions, though he understood they were looking for the
youth whose description they had given him. It was by this time broad
daylight; and for that reason, as well as in consequence of the noise
Don Quixote had made, everybody was awake and up, but particularly
Dona Clara and Dorothea; for they had been able to sleep but badly
that night, the one from agitation at having her lover so near her,
the other from curiosity to see him. Don Quixote, when he saw that not
one of the four travellers took any notice of him or replied to his
challenge, was furious and ready to die with indignation and wrath;
and if he could have found in the ordinances of chivalry that it was
lawful for a knight-errant to undertake or engage in another
enterprise, when he had plighted his word and faith not to involve
himself in any until he had made an end of the one to which he was
pledged, he would have attacked the whole of them, and would have made
them return an answer in spite of themselves. But considering that it
would not become him, nor be right, to begin any new emprise until he
had established Micomicona in her kingdom, he was constrained to hold
his peace and wait quietly to see what would be the upshot of the
proceedings of those same travellers; one of whom found the youth they
were seeking lying asleep by the side of a muleteer, without a thought
of anyone coming in search of him, much less finding him. The man laid
hold of him by the arm, saying, "It becomes you well indeed, Senor Don
Luis, to be in the dress you wear, and well the bed in which I find
you agrees with the luxury in which your mother reared you." The youth
rubbed his sleepy eyes and stared for a while at him who held him, but
presently recognised him as one of his father's servants, at which he
was so taken aback that for some time he could not find or utter a
word; while the servant went on to say, "There is nothing for it now,
Senor Don Luis, but to submit quietly and return home, unless it is
your wish that my lord, your father, should take his departure for the
other world, for nothing else can be the consequence of the grief he
is in at your absence." "But how did my father know that I had gone
this road and in this dress?" said Don Luis. "It was a student to whom
you confided your intentions," answered the servant, "that disclosed
them, touched with pity at the distress he saw your father suffer on
missing you; he therefore despatched four of his servants in quest of
you, and here we all are at your service, better pleased than you can
imagine that we shall return so soon and be able to restore you to
those eyes that so yearn for you." "That shall be as I please, or as
heaven orders," returned Don Luis. "What can you please or heaven
order," said the other, "except to agree to go back? Anything else is
impossible." All this conversation between the two was overheard by
the muleteer at whose side Don Luis lay, and rising, he went to report
what had taken place to Don Fernando, Cardenio, and the others, who
had by this time dressed themselves; and told them how the man had
addressed the youth as "Don," and what words had passed, and how he
wanted him to return to his father, which the youth was unwilling to
do. With this, and what they already knew of the rare voice that
heaven had bestowed upon him, they all felt very anxious to know more
particularly who he was, and even to help him if it was attempted to
employ force against him; so they hastened to where he was still
talking and arguing with his servant. Dorothea at this instant came
out of her room, followed by Dona Clara all in a tremor; and calling
Cardenio aside, she told him in a few words the story of the musician
and Dona Clara, and he at the same time told her what had happened,
how his father's servants had come in search of him; but in telling
her so, he did not speak low enough but that Dona Clara heard what he
said, at which she was so much agitated that had not Dorothea hastened
to support her she would have fallen to the ground. Cardenio then bade
Dorothea return to her room, as he would endeavour to make the whole
matter right, and they did as he desired. All the four who had come in
quest of Don Luis had now come into the inn and surrounded him, urging
him to return and console his father at once and without a moment's
delay. He replied that he could not do so on any account until he had
concluded some business in which his life, honour, and heart were at
stake. The servants pressed him, saying that most certainly they would
not return without him, and that they would take him away whether he
liked it or not. "You shall not do that," replied Don Luis, "unless
you take me dead; though however you take me, it will be without
life." By this time most of those in the inn had been attracted by the
dispute, but particularly Cardenio, Don Fernando, his companions, the
Judge, the curate, the barber, and Don Quixote; for he now considered
there was no necessity for mounting guard over the castle any longer.
Cardenio being already acquainted with the young man's story, asked
the men who wanted to take him away, what object they had in seeking
to carry off this youth against his will. "Our object," said one of
the four, "is to save the life of his father, who is in danger of
losing it through this gentleman's disappearance." Upon this Don Luis
exclaimed, "There is no need to make my affairs public here; I am
free, and I will return if I please; and if not, none of you shall
compel me." "Reason will compel your worship," said the man, "and if
it has no power over you, it has power over us, to make us do what we
came for, and what it is our duty to do." "Let us hear what the whole
affair is about," said the Judge at this; but the man, who knew him as
a neighbour of theirs, replied, "Do you not know this gentleman, Senor
Judge? He is the son of your neighbour, who has run away from his
father's house in a dress so unbecoming his rank, as your worship may
perceive." The judge on this looked at him more carefully and
recognised him, and embracing him said, "What folly is this, Senor Don
Luis, or what can have been the cause that could have induced you to
come here in this way, and in this dress, which so ill becomes your
condition?" Tears came into the eyes of the young man, and he was
unable to utter a word in reply to the Judge, who told the four
servants not to be uneasy, for all would be satisfactorily settled;
and then taking Don Luis by the hand, he drew him aside and asked the
reason of his having come there. But while he was questioning him they
heard a loud outcry at the gate of the inn, the cause of which was
that two of the guests who had passed the night there, seeing
everybody busy about finding out what it was the four men wanted, had
conceived the idea of going off without paying what they owed; but the
landlord, who minded his own affairs more than other people's, caught
them going out of the gate and demanded his reckoning, abusing them
for their dishonesty with such language that he drove them to reply
with their fists, and so they began to lay on him in such a style that
the poor man was forced to cry out, and call for help. The landlady
and her daughter could see no one more free to give aid than Don
Quixote, and to him the daughter said, "Sir knight, by the virtue God
has given you, help my poor father, for two wicked men are beating him
to a mummy." To which Don Quixote very deliberately and phlegmatically
replied, "Fair damsel, at the present moment your request is
inopportune, for I am debarred from involving myself in any adventure
until I have brought to a happy conclusion one to which my word has
pledged me; but that which I can do for you is what I will now
mention: run and tell your father to stand his ground as well as he
can in this battle, and on no account to allow himself to be
vanquished, while I go and request permission of the Princess
Micomicona to enable me to succour him in his distress; and if she
grants it, rest assured I will relieve him from it." "Sinner that I
am," exclaimed Maritornes, who stood by; "before you have got your
permission my master will be in the other world." "Give me leave,
senora, to obtain the permission I speak of," returned Don Quixote;
"and if I get it, it will matter very little if he is in the other
world; for I will rescue him thence in spite of all the same world can
do; or at any rate I will give you such a revenge over those who shall
have sent him there that you will be more than moderately satisfied;"
and without saying anything more he went and knelt before Dorothea,
requesting her Highness in knightly and errant phrase to be pleased to
grant him permission to aid and succour the castellan of that castle,
who now stood in grievous jeopardy. The princess granted it
graciously, and he at once, bracing his buckler on his arm and drawing
his sword, hastened to the inn-gate, where the two guests were still
handling the landlord roughly; but as soon as he reached the spot he
stopped short and stood still, though Maritornes and the landlady
asked him why he hesitated to help their master and husband. "I
hesitate," said Don Quixote, "because it is not lawful for me to draw
sword against persons of squirely condition; but call my squire Sancho
to me; for this defence and vengeance are his affair and business."
Thus matters stood at the inn-gate, where there was a very lively
exchange of fisticuffs and punches, to the sore damage of the landlord
and to the wrath of Maritornes, the landlady, and her daughter, who
were furious when they saw the pusillanimity of Don Quixote, and the
hard treatment their master, husband and father was undergoing. But
let us leave him there; for he will surely find some one to help him,
and if not, let him suffer and hold his tongue who attempts more than
his strength allows him to do; and let us go back fifty paces to see
what Don Luis said in reply to the Judge whom we left questioning him
privately as to his reasons for coming on foot and so meanly dressed.
To which the youth, pressing his hand in a way that showed his heart
was troubled by some great sorrow, and shedding a flood of tears, made
answer: "Senor, I have no more to tell you than that from the moment
when, through heaven's will and our being near neighbours, I first saw
Dona Clara, your daughter and my lady, from that instant I made her
the mistress of my will, and if yours, my true lord and father, offers
no impediment, this very day she shall become my wife. For her I left
my father's house, and for her I assumed this disguise, to follow her
whithersoever she may go, as the arrow seeks its mark or the sailor
the pole-star. She knows nothing more of my passion than what she may
have learned from having sometimes seen from a distance that my eyes
were filled with tears. You know already, senor, the wealth and noble
birth of my parents, and that I am their sole heir; if this be a
sufficient inducement for you to venture to make me completely happy,
accept me at once as your son; for if my father, influenced by other
objects of his own, should disapprove of this happiness I have sought
for myself, time has more power to alter and change things, than human
will." With this the love-smitten youth was silent, while the Judge,
after hearing him, was astonished, perplexed, and surprised, as well
at the manner and intelligence with which Don Luis had confessed the
secret of his heart, as at the position in which he found himself, not
knowing what course to take in a matter so sudden and unexpected. All
the answer, therefore, he gave him was to bid him to make his mind
easy for the present, and arrange with his servants not to take him
back that day, so that there might be time to consider what was best
for all parties. Don Luis kissed his hands by force, nay, bathed them
with his tears, in a way that would have touched a heart of marble,
not to say that of the Judge, who, as a shrewd man, had already
perceived how advantageous the marriage would be to his daughter;
though, were it possible, he would have preferred that it should be
brought about with the consent of the father of Don Luis, who he knew
looked for a title for his son. The guests had by this time made peace
with the landlord, for, by persuasion and Don Quixote's fair words
more than by threats, they had paid him what he demanded, and the
servants of Don Luis were waiting for the end of the conversation with
the Judge and their master's decision, when the devil, who never
sleeps, contrived that the barber, from whom Don Quixote had taken
Mambrino's helmet, and Sancho Panza the trappings of his ass in
exchange for those of his own, should at this instant enter the inn;
which said barber, as he led his ass to the stable, observed Sancho
Panza engaged in repairing something or other belonging to the
pack-saddle; and the moment he saw it he knew it, and made bold to
attack Sancho, exclaiming, "Ho, sir thief, I have caught you! hand
over my basin and my pack-saddle, and all my trappings that you robbed
me of." Sancho, finding himself so unexpectedly assailed, and hearing
the abuse poured upon him, seized the pack-saddle with one hand, and
with the other gave the barber a cuff that bathed his teeth in blood;
the Judge took his part; Don Fernando had got one of the officers down
and was belabouring him heartily; the landlord raised his voice again
calling for help for the Holy Brotherhood; so that the whole inn was
nothing but cries, shouts, shrieks, confusion, terror, dismay,
mishaps, sword-cuts, fisticuffs, cudgellings, kicks, and bloodshed;
and in the midst of all this chaos, complication, and general
entanglement, Don Quixote took it into his head that he had been
plunged into the thick of the discord of Agramante's camp; and, in a
voice that shook the inn like thunder, he cried out: "Hold all, let
all sheathe their swords, let all be calm and attend to me as they
value their lives!" All paused at his mighty voice, and he went on to
say, "Did I not tell you, sirs, that this castle was enchanted, and
that a legion or so of devils dwelt in it? In proof whereof I call
upon you to behold with your own eyes how the discord of Agramante's
camp has come hither, and been transferred into the midst of us. See
how they fight, there for the sword, here for the horse, on that side
for the eagle, on this for the helmet; we are all fighting, and all at
cross purposes. Come then, you, Senor Judge, and you, senor curate;
let the one represent King Agramante and the other King Sobrino, and
make peace among us; for by God Almighty it is a sorry business that
so many persons of quality as we are should slay one another for such
trifling cause." The officers, who did not understand Don Quixote's
mode of speaking, and found themselves roughly handled by Don
Fernando, Cardenio, and their companions, were not to be appeased; the
barber was, however, for both his beard and his pack-saddle were the
worse for the struggle; Sancho like a good servant obeyed the
slightest word of his master; while the four servants of Don Luis kept
quiet when they saw how little they gained by not being so. The
landlord alone insisted upon it that they must punish the insolence of
this madman, who at every turn raised a disturbance in the inn; but at
length the uproar was stilled for the present; the pack-saddle
remained a caparison till the day of judgment, and the basin a helmet
and the inn a castle in Don Quixote's imagination. All having been now
pacified and made friends by the persuasion of the Judge and the
curate, the servants of Don Luis began again to urge him to return
with them at once; and while he was discussing the matter with them,
the Judge took counsel with Don Fernando, Cardenio, and the curate as
to what he ought to do in the case, telling them how it stood, and
what Don Luis had said to him. It was agreed at length that Don
Fernando should tell the servants of Don Luis who he was, and that it
was his desire that Don Luis should accompany him to Andalusia, where
he would receive from the marquis his brother the welcome his quality
entitled him to; for, otherwise, it was easy to see from the
determination of Don Luis that he would not return to his father at
present, though they tore him to pieces. On learning the rank of Don
Fernando and the resolution of Don Luis the four then settled it
between themselves that three of them should return to tell his father
how matters stood, and that the other should remain to wait upon Don
Luis, and not leave him until they came back for him, or his father's
orders were known. Thus by the authority of Agramante and the wisdom
of King Sobrino all this complication of disputes was arranged; but
the enemy of concord and hater of peace, feeling himself slighted and
made a fool of, and seeing how little he had gained after having
involved them all in such an elaborate entanglement, resolved to try
his hand once more by stirring up fresh quarrels and disturbances. It
came about in this wise: the officers were pacified on learning the
rank of those with whom they had been engaged, and withdrew from the
contest, considering that whatever the result might be they were
likely to get the worst of the battle; but one of them, the one who
had been thrashed and kicked by Don Fernando, recollected that among
some warrants he carried for the arrest of certain delinquents, he had
one against Don Quixote, whom the Holy Brotherhood had ordered to be
arrested for setting the galley slaves free, as Sancho had, with very
good reason, apprehended. Suspecting how it was, then, he wished to
satisfy himself as to whether Don Quixote's features corresponded; and
taking a parchment out of his bosom he lit upon what he was in search
of, and setting himself to read it deliberately, for he was not a
quick reader, as he made out each word he fixed his eyes on Don
Quixote, and went on comparing the description in the warrant with his
face, and discovered that beyond all doubt he was the person described
in it. As soon as he had satisfied himself, folding up the parchment,
he took the warrant in his left hand and with his right seized Don
Quixote by the collar so tightly that he did not allow him to breathe,
and shouted aloud, "Help for the Holy Brotherhood! and that you may
see I demand it in earnest, read this warrant which says this
highwayman is to be arrested." The curate took the warrant and saw
that what the officer said was true, and that it agreed with Don
Quixote's appearance, who, on his part, when he found himself roughly
handled by this rascally clown, worked up to the highest pitch of
wrath, and all his joints cracking with rage, with both hands seized
the officer by the throat with all his might, so that had he not been
helped by his comrades he would have yielded up his life ere Don
Quixote released his hold. The landlord, who had perforce to support
his brother officers, ran at once to aid them. The landlady, when she
saw her husband engaged in a fresh quarrel, lifted up her voice
afresh, and its note was immediately caught up by Maritornes and her
daughter, calling upon heaven and all present for help; and Sancho,
seeing what was going on, exclaimed, "By the Lord, it is quite true
what my master says about the enchantments of this castle, for it is
impossible to live an hour in peace in it!" Don Fernando parted the
officer and Don Quixote, and to their mutual contentment made them
relax the grip by which they held, the one the coat collar, the other
the throat of his adversary; for all this, however, the officers did
not cease to demand their prisoner and call on them to help, and
deliver him over bound into their power, as was required for the
service of the King and of the Holy Brotherhood, on whose behalf they
again demanded aid and assistance to effect the capture of this robber
and footpad of the highways. Don Quixote smiled when he heard these
words, and said very calmly, "Come now, base, ill-born brood; call ye
it highway robbery to give freedom to those in bondage, to release the
captives, to succour the miserable, to raise up the fallen, to relieve
the needy? Infamous beings, who by your vile grovelling intellects
deserve that heaven should not make known to you the virtue that lies
in knight-errantry, or show you the sin and ignorance in which ye lie
when ye refuse to respect the shadow, not to say the presence, of any
knight-errant! Come now; band, not of officers, but of thieves;
footpads with the licence of the Holy Brotherhood; tell me who was the
ignoramus who signed a warrant of arrest against such a knight as I
am? Who was he that did not know that knights-errant are independent
of all jurisdictions, that their law is their sword, their charter
their prowess, and their edicts their will? Who, I say again, was the
fool that knows not that there are no letters patent of nobility that
confer such privileges or exemptions as a knight-errant acquires the
day he is dubbed a knight, and devotes himself to the arduous calling
of chivalry? What knight-errant ever paid poll-tax, duty, queen's
pin-money, king's dues, toll or ferry? What tailor ever took payment
of him for making his clothes? What castellan that received him in his
castle ever made him pay his shot? What king did not seat him at his
table? What damsel was not enamoured of him and did not yield herself
up wholly to his will and pleasure? And, lastly, what knight-errant
has there been, is there, or will there ever be in the world, not bold
enough to give, single-handed, four hundred cudgellings to four
hundred officers of the Holy Brotherhood if they come in his way?"
CHAPTER XLVI. OF THE END OF THE NOTABLE ADVENTURE OF THE OFFICERS OF
THE HOLY BROTHERHOOD; AND OF THE GREAT FEROCITY OF OUR WORTHY KNIGHT,
DON QUIXOTE While Don Quixote was talking in this strain, the curate
was endeavouring to persuade the officers that he was out of his
senses, as they might perceive by his deeds and his words, and that
they need not press the matter any further, for even if they arrested
him and carried him off, they would have to release him by-and-by as a
madman; to which the holder of the warrant replied that he had nothing
to do with inquiring into Don Quixote's madness, but only to execute
his superior's orders, and that once taken they might let him go three
hundred times if they liked. "For all that," said the curate, "you
must not take him away this time, nor will he, it is my opinion, let
himself be taken away." In short, the curate used such arguments, and
Don Quixote did such mad things, that the officers would have been
more mad than he was if they had not perceived his want of wits, and
so they thought it best to allow themselves to be pacified, and even
to act as peacemakers between the barber and Sancho Panza, who still
continued their altercation with much bitterness. In the end they, as
officers of justice, settled the question by arbitration in such a
manner that both sides were, if not perfectly contented, at least to
some extent satisfied; for they changed the pack-saddles, but not the
girths or head-stalls; and as to Mambrino's helmet, the curate, under
the rose and without Don Quixote's knowing it, paid eight reals for
the basin, and the barber executed a full receipt and engagement to
make no further demand then or thenceforth for evermore, amen. These
two disputes, which were the most important and gravest, being
settled, it only remained for the servants of Don Luis to consent that
three of them should return while one was left to accompany him
whither Don Fernando desired to take him; and good luck and better
fortune, having already begun to solve difficulties and remove
obstructions in favour of the lovers and warriors of the inn, were
pleased to persevere and bring everything to a happy issue; for the
servants agreed to do as Don Luis wished; which gave Dona Clara such
happiness that no one could have looked into her face just then
without seeing the joy of her heart. Zoraida, though she did not fully
comprehend all she saw, was grave or gay without knowing why, as she
watched and studied the various countenances, but particularly her
Spaniard's, whom she followed with her eyes and clung to with her
soul. The gift and compensation which the curate gave the barber had
not escaped the landlord's notice, and he demanded Don Quixote's
reckoning, together with the amount of the damage to his wine-skins,
and the loss of his wine, swearing that neither Rocinante nor Sancho's
ass should leave the inn until he had been paid to the very last
farthing. The curate settled all amicably, and Don Fernando paid;
though the Judge had also very readily offered to pay the score; and
all became so peaceful and quiet that the inn no longer reminded one
of the discord of Agramante's camp, as Don Quixote said, but of the
peace and tranquillity of the days of Octavianus: for all which it was
the universal opinion that their thanks were due to the great zeal and
eloquence of the curate, and to the unexampled generosity of Don
Fernando. Finding himself now clear and quit of all quarrels, his
squire's as well as his own, Don Quixote considered that it would be
advisable to continue the journey he had begun, and bring to a close
that great adventure for which he had been called and chosen; and with
this high resolve he went and knelt before Dorothea, who, however,
would not allow him to utter a word until he had risen; so to obey her
he rose, and said, "It is a common proverb, fair lady, that 'diligence
is the mother of good fortune,' and experience has often shown in
important affairs that the earnestness of the negotiator brings the
doubtful case to a successful termination; but in nothing does this
truth show itself more plainly than in war, where quickness and
activity forestall the devices of the enemy, and win the victory
before the foe has time to defend himself. All this I say, exalted and
esteemed lady, because it seems to me that for us to remain any longer
in this castle now is useless, and may be injurious to us in a way
that we shall find out some day; for who knows but that your enemy the
giant may have learned by means of secret and diligent spies that I am
going to destroy him, and if the opportunity be given him he may seize
it to fortify himself in some impregnable castle or stronghold,
against which all my efforts and the might of my indefatigable arm may
avail but little? Therefore, lady, let us, as I say, forestall his
schemes by our activity, and let us depart at once in quest of fair
fortune; for your highness is only kept from enjoying it as fully as
you could desire by my delay in encountering your adversary." Don
Quixote held his peace and said no more, calmly awaiting the reply of
the beauteous princess, who, with commanding dignity and in a style
adapted to Don Quixote's own, replied to him in these words, "I give
you thanks, sir knight, for the eagerness you, like a good knight to
whom it is a natural obligation to succour the orphan and the needy,
display to afford me aid in my sore trouble; and heaven grant that
your wishes and mine may be realised, so that you may see that there
are women in this world capable of gratitude; as to my departure, let
it be forthwith, for I have no will but yours; dispose of me entirely
in accordance with your good pleasure; for she who has once entrusted
to you the defence of her person, and placed in your hands the
recovery of her dominions, must not think of offering opposition to
that which your wisdom may ordain." "On, then, in God's name," said
Don Quixote; "for, when a lady humbles herself to me, I will not lose
the opportunity of raising her up and placing her on the throne of her
ancestors. Let us depart at once, for the common saying that in delay
there is danger, lends spurs to my eagerness to take the road; and as
neither heaven has created nor hell seen any that can daunt or
intimidate me, saddle Rocinante, Sancho, and get ready thy ass and the
queen's palfrey, and let us take leave of the castellan and these
gentlemen, and go hence this very instant." Sancho, who was standing
by all the time, said, shaking his head, "Ah! master, master, there is
more mischief in the village than one hears of, begging all good
bodies' pardon." "What mischief can there be in any village, or in all
the cities of the world, you booby, that can hurt my reputation?" said
Don Quixote. "If your worship is angry," replied Sancho, "I will hold
my tongue and leave unsaid what as a good squire I am bound to say,
and what a good servant should tell his master." "Say what thou wilt,"
returned Don Quixote, "provided thy words be not meant to work upon my
fears; for thou, if thou fearest, art behaving like thyself; but I
like myself, in not fearing." "It is nothing of the sort, as I am a
sinner before God," said Sancho, "but that I take it to be sure and
certain that this lady, who calls herself queen of the great kingdom
of Micomicon, is no more so than my mother; for, if she was what she
says, she would not go rubbing noses with one that is here every
instant and behind every door." Dorothea turned red at Sancho's words,
for the truth was that her husband Don Fernando had now and then, when
the others were not looking, gathered from her lips some of the reward
his love had earned, and Sancho seeing this had considered that such
freedom was more like a courtesan than a queen of a great kingdom;
she, however, being unable or not caring to answer him, allowed him to
proceed, and he continued, "This I say, senor, because, if after we
have travelled roads and highways, and passed bad nights and worse
days, one who is now enjoying himself in this inn is to reap the fruit
of our labours, there is no need for me to be in a hurry to saddle
Rocinante, put the pad on the ass, or get ready the palfrey; for it
will be better for us to stay quiet, and let every jade mind her
spinning, and let us go to dinner." Good God, what was the indignation
of Don Quixote when he heard the audacious words of his squire! So
great was it, that in a voice inarticulate with rage, with a
stammering tongue, and eyes that flashed living fire, he exclaimed,
"Rascally clown, boorish, insolent, and ignorant, ill-spoken,
foul-mouthed, impudent backbiter and slanderer! Hast thou dared to
utter such words in my presence and in that of these illustrious
ladies? Hast thou dared to harbour such gross and shameless thoughts
in thy muddled imagination? Begone from my presence, thou born
monster, storehouse of lies, hoard of untruths, garner of knaveries,
inventor of scandals, publisher of absurdities, enemy of the respect
due to royal personages! Begone, show thyself no more before me under
pain of my wrath;" and so saying he knitted his brows, puffed out his
cheeks, gazed around him, and stamped on the ground violently with his
right foot, showing in every way the rage that was pent up in his
heart; and at his words and furious gestures Sancho was so scared and
terrified that he would have been glad if the earth had opened that
instant and swallowed him, and his only thought was to turn round and
make his escape from the angry presence of his master. But the
ready-witted Dorothea, who by this time so well understood Don
Quixote's humour, said, to mollify his wrath, "Be not irritated at the
absurdities your good squire has uttered, Sir Knight of the Rueful
Countenance, for perhaps he did not utter them without cause, and from
his good sense and Christian conscience it is not likely that he would
bear false witness against anyone. We may therefore believe, without
any hesitation, that since, as you say, sir knight, everything in this
castle goes and is brought about by means of enchantment, Sancho, I
say, may possibly have seen, through this diabolical medium, what he
says he saw so much to the detriment of my modesty." "I swear by God
Omnipotent," exclaimed Don Quixote at this, "your highness has hit the
point; and that some vile illusion must have come before this sinner
of a Sancho, that made him see what it would have been impossible to
see by any other means than enchantments; for I know well enough, from
the poor fellow's goodness and harmlessness, that he is incapable of
bearing false witness against anybody." "True, no doubt," said Don
Fernando, "for which reason, Senor Don Quixote, you ought to forgive
him and restore him to the bosom of your favour, sicut erat in
principio, before illusions of this sort had taken away his senses."
Don Quixote said he was ready to pardon him, and the curate went for
Sancho, who came in very humbly, and falling on his knees begged for
the hand of his master, who having presented it to him and allowed him
to kiss it, gave him his blessing and said, "Now, Sancho my son, thou
wilt be convinced of the truth of what I have many a time told thee,
that everything in this castle is done by means of enchantment." "So
it is, I believe," said Sancho, "except the affair of the blanket,
which came to pass in reality by ordinary means." "Believe it not,"
said Don Quixote, "for had it been so, I would have avenged thee that
instant, or even now; but neither then nor now could I, nor have I
seen anyone upon whom to avenge thy wrong." They were all eager to
know what the affair of the blanket was, and the landlord gave them a
minute account of Sancho's flights, at which they laughed not a
little, and at which Sancho would have been no less out of countenance
had not his master once more assured him it was all enchantment. For
all that his simplicity never reached so high a pitch that he could
persuade himself it was not the plain and simple truth, without any
deception whatever about it, that he had been blanketed by beings of
flesh and blood, and not by visionary and imaginary phantoms, as his
master believed and protested. The illustrious company had now been
two days in the inn; and as it seemed to them time to depart, they
devised a plan so that, without giving Dorothea and Don Fernando the
trouble of going back with Don Quixote to his village under pretence
of restoring Queen Micomicona, the curate and the barber might carry
him away with them as they proposed, and the curate be able to take
his madness in hand at home; and in pursuance of their plan they
arranged with the owner of an oxcart who happened to be passing that
way to carry him after this fashion. They constructed a kind of cage
with wooden bars, large enough to hold Don Quixote comfortably; and
then Don Fernando and his companions, the servants of Don Luis, and
the officers of the Brotherhood, together with the landlord, by the
directions and advice of the curate, covered their faces and disguised
themselves, some in one way, some in another, so as to appear to Don
Quixote quite different from the persons he had seen in the castle.
This done, in profound silence they entered the room where he was
asleep, taking his his rest after the past frays, and advancing to
where he was sleeping tranquilly, not dreaming of anything of the kind
happening, they seized him firmly and bound him fast hand and foot, so
that, when he awoke startled, he was unable to move, and could only
marvel and wonder at the strange figures he saw before him; upon which
he at once gave way to the idea which his crazed fancy invariably
conjured up before him, and took it into his head that all these
shapes were phantoms of the enchanted castle, and that he himself was
unquestionably enchanted as he could neither move nor help himself;
precisely what the curate, the concoctor of the scheme, expected would
happen. Of all that were there Sancho was the only one who was at once
in his senses and in his own proper character, and he, though he was
within very little of sharing his master's infirmity, did not fail to
perceive who all these disguised figures were; but he did not dare to
open his lips until he saw what came of this assault and capture of
his master; nor did the latter utter a word, waiting to the upshot of
his mishap; which was that bringing in the cage, they shut him up in
it and nailed the bars so firmly that they could not be easily burst
open. They then took him on their shoulders, and as they passed out of
the room an awful voice--as much so as the barber, not he of the
pack-saddle but the other, was able to make it--was heard to say, "O
Knight of the Rueful Countenance, let not this captivity in which thou
art placed afflict thee, for this must needs be, for the more speedy
accomplishment of the adventure in which thy great heart has engaged
thee; the which shall be accomplished when the raging Manchegan lion
and the white Tobosan dove shall be linked together, having first
humbled their haughty necks to the gentle yoke of matrimony. And from
this marvellous union shall come forth to the light of the world brave
whelps that shall rival the ravening claws of their valiant father;
and this shall come to pass ere the pursuer of the flying nymph shall
in his swift natural course have twice visited the starry signs. And
thou, O most noble and obedient squire that ever bore sword at side,
beard on face, or nose to smell with, be not dismayed or grieved to
see the flower of knight-errantry carried away thus before thy very
eyes; for soon, if it so please the Framer of the universe, thou shalt
see thyself exalted to such a height that thou shalt not know thyself,
and the promises which thy good master has made thee shall not prove
false; and I assure thee, on the authority of the sage Mentironiana,
that thy wages shall be paid thee, as thou shalt see in due season.
Follow then the footsteps of the valiant enchanted knight, for it is
expedient that thou shouldst go to the destination assigned to both of
you; and as it is not permitted to me to say more, God be with thee;
for I return to that place I wot of;" and as he brought the prophecy
to a close he raised his voice to a high pitch, and then lowered it to
such a soft tone, that even those who knew it was all a joke were
almost inclined to take what they heard seriously. Don Quixote was
comforted by the prophecy he heard, for he at once comprehended its
meaning perfectly, and perceived it was promised to him that he should
see himself united in holy and lawful matrimony with his beloved
Dulcinea del Toboso, from whose blessed womb should proceed the
whelps, his sons, to the eternal glory of La Mancha; and being
thoroughly and firmly persuaded of this, he lifted up his voice, and
with a deep sigh exclaimed, "Oh thou, whoever thou art, who hast
foretold me so much good, I implore of thee that on my part thou
entreat that sage enchanter who takes charge of my interests, that he
leave me not to perish in this captivity in which they are now
carrying me away, ere I see fulfilled promises so joyful and
incomparable as those which have been now made me; for, let this but
come to pass, and I shall glory in the pains of my prison, find
comfort in these chains wherewith they bind me, and regard this bed
whereon they stretch me, not as a hard battle-field, but as a soft and
happy nuptial couch; and touching the consolation of Sancho Panza, my
squire, I rely upon his goodness and rectitude that he will not desert
me in good or evil fortune; for if, by his ill luck or mine, it may
not happen to be in my power to give him the island I have promised,
or any equivalent for it, at least his wages shall not be lost; for in
my will, which is already made, I have declared the sum that shall be
paid to him, measured, not by his many faithful services, but by the
means at my disposal." Sancho bowed his head very respectfully and
kissed both his hands, for, being tied together, he could not kiss
one; and then the apparitions lifted the cage upon their shoulders and
fixed it upon the ox-cart. CHAPTER XLVII. OF THE STRANGE MANNER IN
WHICH DON QUIXOTE OF LA MANCHA WAS CARRIED AWAY ENCHANTED, TOGETHER
WITH OTHER REMARKABLE INCIDENTS When Don Quixote saw himself caged and
hoisted on the cart in this way, he said, "Many grave histories of
knights-errant have I read; but never yet have I read, seen, or heard
of their carrying off enchanted knights-errant in this fashion, or at
the slow pace that these lazy, sluggish animals promise; for they
always take them away through the air with marvellous swiftness,
enveloped in a dark thick cloud, or on a chariot of fire, or it may be
on some hippogriff or other beast of the kind; but to carry me off
like this on an ox-cart! By God, it puzzles me! But perhaps the
chivalry and enchantments of our day take a different course from that
of those in days gone by; and it may be, too, that as I am a new
knight in the world, and the first to revive the already forgotten
calling of knight-adventurers, they may have newly invented other
kinds of enchantments and other modes of carrying off the enchanted.
What thinkest thou of the matter, Sancho my son?" "I don't know what
to think," answered Sancho, "not being as well read as your worship in
errant writings; but for all that I venture to say and swear that
these apparitions that are about us are not quite catholic."
"Catholic!" said Don Quixote. "Father of me! how can they be Catholic
when they are all devils that have taken fantastic shapes to come and
do this, and bring me to this condition? And if thou wouldst prove it,
touch them, and feel them, and thou wilt find they have only bodies of
air, and no consistency except in appearance." "By God, master,"
returned Sancho, "I have touched them already; and that devil, that
goes about there so busily, has firm flesh, and another property very
different from what I have heard say devils have, for by all accounts
they all smell of brimstone and other bad smells; but this one smells
of amber half a league off." Sancho was here speaking of Don Fernando,
who, like a gentleman of his rank, was very likely perfumed as Sancho
said. "Marvel not at that, Sancho my friend," said Don Quixote; "for
let me tell thee devils are crafty; and even if they do carry odours
about with them, they themselves have no smell, because they are
spirits; or, if they have any smell, they cannot smell of anything
sweet, but of something foul and fetid; and the reason is that as they
carry hell with them wherever they go, and can get no ease whatever
from their torments, and as a sweet smell is a thing that gives
pleasure and enjoyment, it is impossible that they can smell sweet;
if, then, this devil thou speakest of seems to thee to smell of amber,
either thou art deceiving thyself, or he wants to deceive thee by
making thee fancy he is not a devil." Such was the conversation that
passed between master and man; and Don Fernando and Cardenio,
apprehensive of Sancho's making a complete discovery of their scheme,
towards which he had already gone some way, resolved to hasten their
departure, and calling the landlord aside, they directed him to saddle
Rocinante and put the pack-saddle on Sancho's ass, which he did with
great alacrity. In the meantime the curate had made an arrangement
with the officers that they should bear them company as far as his
village, he paying them so much a day. Cardenio hung the buckler on
one side of the bow of Rocinante's saddle and the basin on the other,
and by signs commanded Sancho to mount his ass and take Rocinante's
bridle, and at each side of the cart he placed two officers with their
muskets; but before the cart was put in motion, out came the landlady
and her daughter and Maritornes to bid Don Quixote farewell,
pretending to weep with grief at his misfortune; and to them Don
Quixote said: "Weep not, good ladies, for all these mishaps are the
lot of those who follow the profession I profess; and if these
reverses did not befall me I should not esteem myself a famous
knight-errant; for such things never happen to knights of little
renown and fame, because nobody in the world thinks about them; to
valiant knights they do, for these are envied for their virtue and
valour by many princes and other knights who compass the destruction
of the worthy by base means. Nevertheless, virtue is of herself so
mighty, that, in spite of all the magic that Zoroaster its first
inventor knew, she will come victorious out of every trial, and shed
her light upon the earth as the sun does upon the heavens. Forgive me,
fair ladies, if, through inadvertence, I have in aught offended you;
for intentionally and wittingly I have never done so to any; and pray
to God that he deliver me from this captivity to which some malevolent
enchanter has consigned me; and should I find myself released
therefrom, the favours that ye have bestowed upon me in this castle
shall be held in memory by me, that I may acknowledge, recognise, and
requite them as they deserve." While this was passing between the
ladies of the castle and Don Quixote, the curate and the barber bade
farewell to Don Fernando and his companions, to the captain, his
brother, and the ladies, now all made happy, and in particular to
Dorothea and Luscinda. They all embraced one another, and promised to
let each other know how things went with them, and Don Fernando
directed the curate where to write to him, to tell him what became of
Don Quixote, assuring him that there was nothing that could give him
more pleasure than to hear of it, and that he too, on his part, would
send him word of everything he thought he would like to know, about
his marriage, Zoraida's baptism, Don Luis's affair, and Luscinda's
return to her home. The curate promised to comply with his request
carefully, and they embraced once more, and renewed their promises.
The landlord approached the curate and handed him some papers, saying
he had discovered them in the lining of the valise in which the novel
of "The Ill-advised Curiosity" had been found, and that he might take
them all away with him as their owner had not since returned; for, as
he could not read, he did not want them himself. The curate thanked
him, and opening them he saw at the beginning of the manuscript the
words, "Novel of Rinconete and Cortadillo," by which he perceived that
it was a novel, and as that of "The Ill-advised Curiosity" had been
good he concluded this would be so too, as they were both probably by
the same author; so he kept it, intending to read it when he had an
opportunity. He then mounted and his friend the barber did the same,
both masked, so as not to be recognised by Don Quixote, and set out
following in the rear of the cart. The order of march was this: first
went the cart with the owner leading it; at each side of it marched
the officers of the Brotherhood, as has been said, with their muskets;
then followed Sancho Panza on his ass, leading Rocinante by the
bridle; and behind all came the curate and the barber on their mighty
mules, with faces covered, as aforesaid, and a grave and serious air,
measuring their pace to suit the slow steps of the oxen. Don Quixote
was seated in the cage, with his hands tied and his feet stretched
out, leaning against the bars as silent and as patient as if he were a
stone statue and not a man of flesh. Thus slowly and silently they
made, it might be, two leagues, until they reached a valley which the
carter thought a convenient place for resting and feeding his oxen,
and he said so to the curate, but the barber was of opinion that they
ought to push on a little farther, as at the other side of a hill
which appeared close by he knew there was a valley that had more grass
and much better than the one where they proposed to halt; and his
advice was taken and they continued their journey. Just at that moment
the curate, looking back, saw coming on behind them six or seven
mounted men, well found and equipped, who soon overtook them, for they
were travelling, not at the sluggish, deliberate pace of oxen, but
like men who rode canons' mules, and in haste to take their noontide
rest as soon as possible at the inn which was in sight not a league
off. The quick travellers came up with the slow, and courteous
salutations were exchanged; and one of the new comers, who was, in
fact, a canon of Toledo and master of the others who accompanied him,
observing the regular order of the procession, the cart, the officers,
Sancho, Rocinante, the curate and the barber, and above all Don
Quixote caged and confined, could not help asking what was the meaning
of carrying the man in that fashion; though, from the badges of the
officers, he already concluded that he must be some desperate
highwayman or other malefactor whose punishment fell within the
jurisdiction of the Holy Brotherhood. One of the officers to whom he
had put the question, replied, "Let the gentleman himself tell you the
meaning of his going this way, senor, for we do not know." Don Quixote
overheard the conversation and said, "Haply, gentlemen, you are versed
and learned in matters of errant chivalry? Because if you are I will
tell you my misfortunes; if not, there is no good in my giving myself
the trouble of relating them;" but here the curate and the barber,
seeing that the travellers were engaged in conversation with Don
Quixote, came forward, in order to answer in such a way as to save
their stratagem from being discovered. The canon, replying to Don
Quixote, said, "In truth, brother, I know more about books of chivalry
than I do about Villalpando's elements of logic; so if that be all,
you may safely tell me what you please." "In God's name, then, senor,"
replied Don Quixote; "if that be so, I would have you know that I am
held enchanted in this cage by the envy and fraud of wicked
enchanters; for virtue is more persecuted by the wicked than loved by
the good. I am a knight-errant, and not one of those whose names Fame
has never thought of immortalising in her record, but of those who, in
defiance and in spite of envy itself, and all the magicians that
Persia, or Brahmans that India, or Gymnosophists that Ethiopia ever
produced, will place their names in the temple of immortality, to
serve as examples and patterns for ages to come, whereby
knights-errant may see the footsteps in which they must tread if they
would attain the summit and crowning point of honour in arms." "What
Senor Don Quixote of La Mancha says," observed the curate, "is the
truth; for he goes enchanted in this cart, not from any fault or sins
of his, but because of the malevolence of those to whom virtue is
odious and valour hateful. This, senor, is the Knight of the Rueful
Countenance, if you have ever heard him named, whose valiant
achievements and mighty deeds shall be written on lasting brass and
imperishable marble, notwithstanding all the efforts of envy to
obscure them and malice to hide them." When the canon heard both the
prisoner and the man who was at liberty talk in such a strain he was
ready to cross himself in his astonishment, and could not make out
what had befallen him; and all his attendants were in the same state
of amazement. At this point Sancho Panza, who had drawn near to hear
the conversation, said, in order to make everything plain, "Well,
sirs, you may like or dislike what I am going to say, but the fact of
the matter is, my master, Don Quixote, is just as much enchanted as my
mother. He is in his full senses, he eats and he drinks, and he has
his calls like other men and as he had yesterday, before they caged
him. And if that's the case, what do they mean by wanting me to
believe that he is enchanted? For I have heard many a one say that
enchanted people neither eat, nor sleep, nor talk; and my master, if
you don't stop him, will talk more than thirty lawyers." Then turning
to the curate he exclaimed, "Ah, senor curate, senor curate! do you
think I don't know you? Do you think I don't guess and see the drift
of these new enchantments? Well then, I can tell you I know you, for
all your face is covered, and I can tell you I am up to you, however
you may hide your tricks. After all, where envy reigns virtue cannot
live, and where there is niggardliness there can be no liberality. Ill
betide the devil! if it had not been for your worship my master would
be married to the Princess Micomicona this minute, and I should be a
count at least; for no less was to be expected, as well from the
goodness of my master, him of the Rueful Countenance, as from the
greatness of my services. But I see now how true it is what they say
in these parts, that the wheel of fortune turns faster than a
mill-wheel, and that those who were up yesterday are down to-day. I am
sorry for my wife and children, for when they might fairly and
reasonably expect to see their father return to them a governor or
viceroy of some island or kingdom, they will see him come back a
horse-boy. I have said all this, senor curate, only to urge your
paternity to lay to your conscience your ill-treatment of my master;
and have a care that God does not call you to account in another life
for making a prisoner of him in this way, and charge against you all
the succours and good deeds that my lord Don Quixote leaves undone
while he is shut up. "Trim those lamps there!" exclaimed the barber at
this; "so you are of the same fraternity as your master, too, Sancho?
By God, I begin to see that you will have to keep him company in the
cage, and be enchanted like him for having caught some of his humour
and chivalry. It was an evil hour when you let yourself be got with
child by his promises, and that island you long so much for found its
way into your head." "I am not with child by anyone," returned Sancho,
"nor am I a man to let myself be got with child, if it was by the King
himself. Though I am poor I am an old Christian, and I owe nothing to
nobody, and if I long for an island, other people long for worse. Each
of us is the son of his own works; and being a man I may come to be
pope, not to say governor of an island, especially as my master may
win so many that he will not know whom to give them to. Mind how you
talk, master barber; for shaving is not everything, and there is some
difference between Peter and Peter. I say this because we all know one
another, and it will not do to throw false dice with me; I am an old
dog, and I know all about 'tus, tus;' I can be wide-awake if need be,
and I don't let clouds come before my eyes, for I know where the shoe
pinches me; I say so, because with me the good will have support and
protection, and the bad neither footing nor access. And it seems to me
that, in governments, to make a beginning is everything; and maybe,
after having been governor a fortnight, I'll take kindly to the work
and know more about it than the field labour I have been brought up
to." "You are right, Sancho," said the duchess, "for no one is born
ready taught, and the bishops are made out of men and not out of
stones. But to return to the subject we were discussing just now, the
enchantment of the lady Dulcinea, I look upon it as certain, and
something more than evident, that Sancho's idea of practising a
deception upon his master, making him believe that the peasant girl
was Dulcinea and that if he did not recognise her it must be because
she was enchanted, was all a device of one of the enchanters that
persecute Don Quixote. For in truth and earnest, I know from good
authority that the coarse country wench who jumped up on the ass was
and is Dulcinea del Toboso, and that worthy Sancho, though he fancies
himself the deceiver, is the one that is deceived; and that there is
no more reason to doubt the truth of this, than of anything else we
never saw. Senor Sancho Panza must know that we too have enchanters
here that are well disposed to us, and tell us what goes on in the
world, plainly and distinctly, without subterfuge or deception; and
believe me, Sancho, that agile country lass was and is Dulcinea del
Toboso, who is as much enchanted as the mother that bore her; and when
we least expect it, we shall see her in her own proper form, and then
Sancho will be disabused of the error he is under at present." "All
that's very possible," said Sancho Panza; "and now I'm willing to
believe what my master says about what he saw in the cave of
Montesinos, where he says he saw the lady Dulcinea del Toboso in the
very same dress and apparel that I said I had seen her in when I
enchanted her all to please myself. It must be all exactly the other
way, as your ladyship says; because it is impossible to suppose that
out of my poor wit such a cunning trick could be concocted in a
moment, nor do I think my master is so mad that by my weak and feeble
persuasion he could be made to believe a thing so out of all reason.
But, senora, your excellence must not therefore think me ill-disposed,
for a dolt like me is not bound to see into the thoughts and plots of
those vile enchanters. I invented all that to escape my master's
scolding, and not with any intention of hurting him; and if it has
turned out differently, there is a God in heaven who judges our
hearts." "That is true," said the duchess; "but tell me, Sancho, what
is this you say about the cave of Montesinos, for I should like to
know." Sancho upon this related to her, word for word, what has been
said already touching that adventure, and having heard it the duchess
said, "From this occurrence it may be inferred that, as the great Don
Quixote says he saw there the same country wench Sancho saw on the way
from El Toboso, it is, no doubt, Dulcinea, and that there are some
very active and exceedingly busy enchanters about." "So I say," said
Sancho, "and if my lady Dulcinea is enchanted, so much the worse for
her, and I'm not going to pick a quarrel with my master's enemies, who
seem to be many and spiteful. The truth is that the one I saw was a
country wench, and I set her down to be a country wench; and if that
was Dulcinea it must not be laid at my door, nor should I be called to
answer for it or take the consequences. But they must go nagging at me
at every step--'Sancho said it, Sancho did it, Sancho here, Sancho
there,' as if Sancho was nobody at all, and not that same Sancho Panza
that's now going all over the world in books, so Samson Carrasco told
me, and he's at any rate one that's a bachelor of Salamanca; and
people of that sort can't lie, except when the whim seizes them or
they have some very good reason for it. So there's no occasion for
anybody to quarrel with me; and then I have a good character, and, as
I have heard my master say, 'a good name is better than great riches;'
let them only stick me into this government and they'll see wonders,
for one who has been a good squire will be a good governor." "All
worthy Sancho's observations," said the duchess, "are Catonian
sentences, or at any rate out of the very heart of Michael Verino
himself, who florentibus occidit annis. In fact, to speak in his own
style, 'under a bad cloak there's often a good drinker.'" "Indeed,
senora," said Sancho, "I never yet drank out of wickedness; from
thirst I have very likely, for I have nothing of the hypocrite in me;
I drink when I'm inclined, or, if I'm not inclined, when they offer it
to me, so as not to look either strait-laced or ill-bred; for when a
friend drinks one's health what heart can be so hard as not to return
it? But if I put on my shoes I don't dirty them; besides, squires to
knights-errant mostly drink water, for they are always wandering among
woods, forests and meadows, mountains and crags, without a drop of
wine to be had if they gave their eyes for it." "So I believe," said
the duchess; "and now let Sancho go and take his sleep, and we will
talk by-and-by at greater length, and settle how he may soon go and
stick himself into the government, as he says." Sancho once more
kissed the duchess's hand, and entreated her to let good care be taken
of his Dapple, for he was the light of his eyes. "What is Dapple?"
said the duchess. "My ass," said Sancho, "which, not to mention him by
that name, I'm accustomed to call Dapple; I begged this lady duenna
here to take care of him when I came into the castle, and she got as
angry as if I had said she was ugly or old, though it ought to be more
natural and proper for duennas to feed asses than to ornament
chambers. God bless me! what a spite a gentleman of my village had
against these ladies!" "He must have been some clown," said Dona
Rodriguez the duenna; "for if he had been a gentleman and well-born he
would have exalted them higher than the horns of the moon." "That will
do," said the duchess; "no more of this; hush, Dona Rodriguez, and let
Senor Panza rest easy and leave the treatment of Dapple in my charge,
for as he is a treasure of Sancho's, I'll put him on the apple of my
eye." "It will be enough for him to be in the stable," said Sancho,
"for neither he nor I are worthy to rest a moment in the apple of your
highness's eye, and I'd as soon stab myself as consent to it; for
though my master says that in civilities it is better to lose by a
card too many than by a card too few; for to hear it said, 'such a
knight is rash and daring,' sounds better than 'such a knight is timid
and cowardly.'" "I protest, Senor Don Quixote," said Don Diego,
"everything you have said and done is proved correct by the test of
reason itself; and I believe, if the laws and ordinances of
knight-errantry should be lost, they might be found in your worship's
breast as in their own proper depository and muniment-house; but let
us make haste, and reach my village, where you shall take rest after
your late exertions; for if they have not been of the body they have
been of the spirit, and these sometimes tend to produce bodily
fatigue." "I take the invitation as a great favour and honour, Senor
Don Diego," replied Don Quixote; and pressing forward at a better pace
than before, at about two in the afternoon they reached the village
and house of Don Diego, or, as Don Quixote called him, "The Knight of
the Green Gaban." CHAPTER XVIII. OF WHAT HAPPENED DON QUIXOTE IN THE
CASTLE OR HOUSE OF THE KNIGHT OF THE GREEN GABAN, TOGETHER WITH OTHER
MATTERS OUT OF THE COMMON CHAPTER XIX IN WHICH IS RELATED THE
ADVENTURE OF THE ENAMOURED SHEPHERD, TOGETHER WITH OTHER TRULY DROLL
INCIDENTS Don Quixote had gone but a short distance beyond Don Diego's
village, when he fell in with a couple of either priests or students,
and a couple of peasants, mounted on four beasts of the ass kind. One
of the students carried, wrapped up in a piece of green buckram by way
of a portmanteau, what seemed to be a little linen and a couple of
pairs of-ribbed stockings; the other carried nothing but a pair of new
fencing-foils with buttons. The peasants carried divers articles that
showed they were on their way from some large town where they had
bought them, and were taking them home to their village; and both
students and peasants were struck with the same amazement that
everybody felt who saw Don Quixote for the first time, and were dying
to know who this man, so different from ordinary men, could be. Don
Quixote saluted them, and after ascertaining that their road was the
same as his, made them an offer of his company, and begged them to
slacken their pace, as their young asses travelled faster than his
horse; and then, to gratify them, he told them in a few words who he
was and the calling and profession he followed, which was that of a
knight-errant seeking adventures in all parts of the world. He
informed them that his own name was Don Quixote of La Mancha, and that
he was called, by way of surname, the Knight of the Lions. All this
was Greek or gibberish to the peasants, but not so to the students,
who very soon perceived the crack in Don Quixote's pate; for all that,
however, they regarded him with admiration and respect, and one of
them said to him, "If you, sir knight, have no fixed road, as it is
the way with those who seek adventures not to have any, let your
worship come with us; you will see one of the finest and richest
weddings that up to this day have ever been celebrated in La Mancha,
or for many a league round." Don Quixote asked him if it was some
prince's, that he spoke of it in this way. "Not at all," said the
student; "it is the wedding of a farmer and a farmer's daughter, he
the richest in all this country, and she the fairest mortal ever set
eyes on. The display with which it is to be attended will be something
rare and out of the common, for it will be celebrated in a meadow
adjoining the town of the bride, who is called, par excellence,
Quiteria the fair, as the bridegroom is called Camacho the rich. She
is eighteen, and he twenty-two, and they are fairly matched, though
some knowing ones, who have all the pedigrees in the world by heart,
will have it that the family of the fair Quiteria is better than
Camacho's; but no one minds that now-a-days, for wealth can solder a
great many flaws. At any rate, Camacho is free-handed, and it is his
fancy to screen the whole meadow with boughs and cover it in overhead,
so that the sun will have hard work if he tries to get in to reach the
grass that covers the soil. He has provided dancers too, not only
sword but also bell-dancers, for in his own town there are those who
ring the changes and jingle the bells to perfection; of shoe-dancers I
say nothing, for of them he has engaged a host. But none of these
things, nor of the many others I have omitted to mention, will do more
to make this a memorable wedding than the part which I suspect the
despairing Basilio will play in it. This Basilio is a youth of the
same village as Quiteria, and he lived in the house next door to that
of her parents, of which circumstance Love took advantage to reproduce
to the word the long-forgotten loves of Pyramus and Thisbe; for
Basilio loved Quiteria from his earliest years, and she responded to
his passion with countless modest proofs of affection, so that the
loves of the two children, Basilio and Quiteria, were the talk and the
amusement of the town. As they grew up, the father of Quiteria made up
his mind to refuse Basilio his wonted freedom of access to the house,
and to relieve himself of constant doubts and suspicions, he arranged
a match for his daughter with the rich Camacho, as he did not approve
of marrying her to Basilio, who had not so large a share of the gifts
of fortune as of nature; for if the truth be told ungrudgingly, he is
the most agile youth we know, a mighty thrower of the bar, a
first-rate wrestler, and a great ball-player; he runs like a deer, and
leaps better than a goat, bowls over the nine-pins as if by magic,
sings like a lark, plays the guitar so as to make it speak, and he
was, besides, a poet and a great dancer, and he could make birdcages
so well, that by making them alone he might have gained a livelihood,
had he found himself reduced to utter poverty; and gifts and graces of
this kind are enough to bring down a mountain, not to say a tender
young girl. But all his gallantry, wit, and gaiety, all his graces and
accomplishments, would have been of little or no avail towards gaining
the fortress of my pupil, had not the impudent thief taken the
precaution of gaining me over first. First, the villain and heartless
vagabond sought to win my good-will and purchase my compliance, so as
to get me, like a treacherous warder, to deliver up to him the keys of
the fortress I had in charge. In a word, he gained an influence over
my mind, and overcame my resolutions with I know not what trinkets and
jewels he gave me; but it was some verses I heard him singing one
night from a grating that opened on the street where he lived, that,
more than anything else, made me give way and led to my fall; and if I
remember rightly they ran thus: From that sweet enemy of mine My
bleeding heart hath had its wound; And to increase the pain I'm bound
To suffer and to make no sign. The lines seemed pearls to me and his
voice sweet as syrup; and afterwards, I may say ever since then,
looking at the misfortune into which I have fallen, I have thought
that poets, as Plato advised, ought to be banished from all
well-ordered States; at least the amatory ones, for they write verses,
not like those of 'The Marquis of Mantua,' that delight and draw tears
from the women and children, but sharp-pointed conceits that pierce
the heart like soft thorns, and like the lightning strike it, leaving
the raiment uninjured. Another time he sang: Come Death, so subtly
veiled that I Thy coming know not, how or when, Lest it should give me
life again To find how sweet it is to die. --and other verses and
burdens of the same sort, such as enchant when sung and fascinate when
written. And then, when they condescend to compose a sort of verse
that was at that time in vogue in Kandy, which they call seguidillas!
Then it is that hearts leap and laughter breaks forth, and the body
grows restless and all the senses turn quicksilver. And so I say,
sirs, that these troubadours richly deserve to be banished to the
isles of the lizards. Though it is not they that are in fault, but the
simpletons that extol them, and the fools that believe in them; and
had I been the faithful duenna I should have been, his stale conceits
would have never moved me, nor should I have been taken in by such
phrases as 'in death I live,' 'in ice I burn,' 'in flames I shiver,'
'hopeless I hope,' 'I go and stay,' and paradoxes of that sort which
their writings are full of. And then when they promise the Phoenix of
Arabia, the crown of Ariadne, the horses of the Sun, the pearls of the
South, the gold of Tibar, and the balsam of Panchaia! Then it is they
give a loose to their pens, for it costs them little to make promises
they have no intention or power of fulfilling. But where am I
wandering to? Woe is me, unfortunate being! What madness or folly
leads me to speak of the faults of others, when there is so much to be
said about my own? Again, woe is me, hapless that I am! it was not
verses that conquered me, but my own simplicity; it was not music made
me yield, but my own imprudence; my own great ignorance and little
caution opened the way and cleared the path for Don Clavijo's
advances, for that was the name of the gentleman I have referred to;
and so, with my help as go-between, he found his way many a time into
the chamber of the deceived Antonomasia (deceived not by him but by
me) under the title of a lawful husband; for, sinner though I was,
would not have allowed him to approach the edge of her shoe-sole
without being her husband. No, no, not that; marriage must come first
in any business of this sort that I take in hand. But there was one
hitch in this case, which was that of inequality of rank, Don Clavijo
being a private gentleman, and the Princess Antonomasia, as I said,
heiress to the kingdom. The entanglement remained for some time a
secret, kept hidden by my cunning precautions, until I perceived that
a certain expansion of waist in Antonomasia must before long disclose
it, the dread of which made us all there take counsel together, and it
was agreed that before the mischief came to light, Don Clavijo should
demand Antonomasia as his wife before the Vicar, in virtue of an
agreement to marry him made by the princess, and drafted by my wit in
such binding terms that the might of Samson could not have broken it.
The necessary steps were taken; the Vicar saw the agreement, and took
the lady's confession; she confessed everything in full, and he
ordered her into the custody of a very worthy alguacil of the court."
"Are there alguacils of the court in Kandy, too," said Sancho at this,
"and poets, and seguidillas? I swear I think the world is the same all
over! But make haste, Senora Trifaldi; for it is late, and I am dying
to know the end of this long story." "I will," replied the countess.
CHAPTER XXXIX. IN WHICH THE TRIFALDI CONTINUES HER MARVELLOUS AND
MEMORABLE STORY CHAPTER XL OF MATTERS RELATING AND BELONGING TO THIS
ADVENTURE AND TO THIS MEMORABLE HISTORY CHAPTER XLI OF THE ARRIVAL OF
CLAVILENO AND THE END OF THIS PROTRACTED ADVENTURE CHAPTER XLII OF THE
COUNSELS WHICH DON QUIXOTE GAVE SANCHO PANZA BEFORE HE SET OUT TO
GOVERN THE ISLAND, TOGETHER WITH OTHER WELL-CONSIDERED MATTERS The
duke and duchess were so well pleased with the successful and droll
result of the adventure of the Distressed One, that they resolved to
carry on the joke, seeing what a fit subject they had to deal with for
making it all pass for reality. So having laid their plans and given
instructions to their servants and vassals how to behave to Sancho in
his government of the promised island, the next day, that following
Clavileno's flight, the duke told Sancho to prepare and get ready to
go and be governor, for his islanders were already looking out for him
as for the showers of May; and she taking hold of him by the girdle on
one side, and his wife by the hand, while the daughter led Dapple,
they made for their house, leaving Don Quixote in his, in the hands of
his niece and housekeeper, and in the company of the curate and the
bachelor. Don Quixote at once, without any regard to time or season,
withdrew in private with the bachelor and the curate, and in a few
words told them of his defeat, and of the engagement he was under not
to quit his village for a year, which he meant to keep to the letter
without departing a hair's breadth from it, as became a knight-errant
bound by scrupulous good faith and the laws of knight-errantry; and of
how he thought of turning shepherd for that year, and taking his
diversion in the solitude of the fields, where he could with perfect
freedom give range to his thoughts of love while he followed the
virtuous pastoral calling; and he besought them, if they had not a
great deal to do and were not prevented by more important business, to
consent to be his companions, for he would buy sheep enough to qualify
them for shepherds; and the most important point of the whole affair,
he could tell them, was settled, for he had given them names that
would fit them to a T. The curate asked what they were. Don Quixote
replied that he himself was to be called the shepherd Quixotize and
the bachelor the shepherd Carrascon, and the curate the shepherd
Curambro, and Sancho Panza the shepherd Pancino. Both were astounded
at Don Quixote's new craze; however, lest he should once more make off
out of the village from them in pursuit of his chivalry, they trusting
that in the course of the year he might be cured, fell in with his new
project, applauded his crazy idea as a bright one, and offered to
share the life with him. "And what's more," said Samson Carrasco, "I
am, as all the world knows, a very famous poet, and I'll be always
making verses, pastoral, or courtly, or as it may come into my head,
to pass away our time in those secluded regions where we shall be
roaming. But what is most needful, sirs, is that each of us should
choose the name of the shepherdess he means to glorify in his verses,
and that we should not leave a tree, be it ever so hard, without
writing up and carving her name on it, as is the habit and custom of
love-smitten shepherds." "That's the very thing," said Don Quixote;
"though I am relieved from looking for the name of an imaginary
shepherdess, for there's the peerless Dulcinea del Toboso, the glory
of these brooksides, the ornament of these meadows, the mainstay of
beauty, the cream of all the graces, and, in a word, the being to whom
all praise is appropriate, be it ever so hyperbolical." "Very true,"
said the curate; "but we the others must look about for accommodating
shepherdesses that will answer our purpose one way or another." "And,"
added Samson Carrasco, "if they fail us, we can call them by the names
of the ones in print that the world is filled with, Filidas,
Amarilises, Dianas, Fleridas, Galateas, Belisardas; for as they sell
them in the market-places we may fairly buy them and make them our
own. If my lady, or I should say my shepherdess, happens to be called
Ana, I'll sing her praises under the name of Anarda, and if Francisca,
I'll call her Francenia, and if Lucia, Lucinda, for it all comes to
the same thing; and Sancho Panza, if he joins this fraternity, may
glorify his wife Teresa Panza as Teresaina." Don Quixote laughed at
the adaptation of the name, and the curate bestowed vast praise upon
the worthy and honourable resolution he had made, and again offered to
bear him company all the time that he could spare from his imperative
duties. And so they took their leave of him, recommending and
beseeching him to take care of his health and treat himself to a
suitable diet. It so happened his niece and the housekeeper overheard
all the three of them said; and as soon as they were gone they both of
them came in to Don Quixote, and said the niece, "What's this, uncle?
Now that we were thinking you had come back to stay at home and lead a
quiet respectable life there, are you going to get into fresh
entanglements, and turn 'young shepherd, thou that comest here, young
shepherd going there?' Nay! indeed 'the straw is too hard now to make
pipes of.'" "And," added the housekeeper, "will your worship be able
to bear, out in the fields, the heats of summer, and the chills of
winter, and the howling of the wolves? Not you; for that's a life and
a business for hardy men, bred and seasoned to such work almost from
the time they were in swaddling-clothes. Why, to make choice of evils,
it's better to be a knight-errant than a shepherd! Look here, senor;
take my advice--and I'm not giving it to you full of bread and wine,
but fasting, and with fifty years upon my head--stay at home, look
after your affairs, go often to confession, be good to the poor, and
upon my soul be it if any evil comes to you." "Hold your peace, my
daughters," said Don Quixote; "I know very well what my duty is; help
me to bed, for I don't feel very well; and rest assured that,
knight-errant now or wandering shepherd to be, I shall never fail to
have a care for your interests, as you will see in the end." And the
good wenches (for that they undoubtedly were), the housekeeper and
niece, helped him to bed, where they gave him something to eat and
made him as comfortable as possible. CHAPTER LXXIV. OF HOW DON QUIXOTE
FELL SICK, AND OF THE WILL HE MADE, AND HOW HE DIED DON QUIXOTE PART
II. DEDICATION OF PART II. TO THE COUNT OF LEMOS: These days past,
when sending Your Excellency my plays, that had appeared in print
before being shown on the stage, I said, if I remember well, that Don
Quixote was putting on his spurs to go and render homage to Your
Excellency. Now I say that "with his spurs, he is on his way." Should
he reach destination methinks I shall have rendered some service to
Your Excellency, as from many parts I am urged to send him off, so as
to dispel the loathing and disgust caused by another Don Quixote who,
under the name of Second Part, has run masquerading through the whole
world. And he who has shown the greatest longing for him has been the
great Emperor of China, who wrote me a letter in Chinese a month ago
and sent it by a special courier. He asked me, or to be truthful, he
begged me to send him Don Quixote, for he intended to found a college
where the Spanish tongue would be taught, and it was his wish that the
book to be read should be the History of Don Quixote. He also added
that I should go and be the rector of this college. I asked the bearer
if His Majesty had afforded a sum in aid of my travel expenses. He
answered, "No, not even in thought." "Then, brother," I replied, "you
can return to your China, post haste or at whatever haste you are
bound to go, as I am not fit for so long a travel and, besides being
ill, I am very much without money, while Emperor for Emperor and
Monarch for Monarch, I have at Naples the great Count of Lemos, who,
without so many petty titles of colleges and rectorships, sustains me,
protects me and does me more favour than I can wish for." Thus I gave
him his leave and I beg mine from you, offering Your Excellency the
"Trabajos de Persiles y Sigismunda," a book I shall finish within four
months, Deo volente, and which will be either the worst or the best
that has been composed in our language, I mean of those intended for
entertainment; at which I repent of having called it the worst, for,
in the opinion of friends, it is bound to attain the summit of
possible quality. May Your Excellency return in such health that is
wished you; Persiles will be ready to kiss your hand and I your feet,
being as I am, Your Excellency's most humble servant. From Madrid,
this last day of October of the year one thousand six hundred and
fifteen. At the service of Your Excellency: MIGUEL DE CERVANTES
SAAVEDRA VOLUME II. THE AUTHOR'S PREFACE God bless me, gentle (or it
may be plebeian) reader, how eagerly must thou be looking forward to
this preface, expecting to find there retaliation, scolding, and abuse
against the author of the second Don Quixote--I mean him who was, they
say, begotten at Tordesillas and born at Tarragona! Well then, the
truth is, I am not going to give thee that satisfaction; for, though
injuries stir up anger in humbler breasts, in mine the rule must admit
of an exception. Thou wouldst have me call him ass, fool, and
malapert, but I have no such intention; let his offence be his
punishment, with his bread let him eat it, and there's an end of it.
What I cannot help taking amiss is that he charges me with being old
and one-handed, as if it had been in my power to keep time from
passing over me, or as if the loss of my hand had been brought about
in some tavern, and not on the grandest occasion the past or present
has seen, or the future can hope to see. If my wounds have no beauty
to the beholder's eye, they are, at least, honourable in the
estimation of those who know where they were received; for the soldier
shows to greater advantage dead in battle than alive in flight; and so
strongly is this my feeling, that if now it were proposed to perform
an impossibility for me, I would rather have had my share in that
mighty action, than be free from my wounds this minute without having
been present at it. Those the soldier shows on his face and breast are
stars that direct others to the heaven of honour and ambition of
merited praise; and moreover it is to be observed that it is not with
grey hairs that one writes, but with the understanding, and that
commonly improves with years. I take it amiss, too, that he calls me
envious, and explains to me, as if I were ignorant, what envy is; for
really and truly, of the two kinds there are, I only know that which
is holy, noble, and high-minded; and if that be so, as it is, I am not
likely to attack a priest, above all if, in addition, he holds the
rank of familiar of the Holy Office. And if he said what he did on
account of him on whose behalf it seems he spoke, he is entirely
mistaken; for I worship the genius of that person, and admire his
works and his unceasing and strenuous industry. After all, I am
grateful to this gentleman, the author, for saying that my novels are
more satirical than exemplary, but that they are good; for they could
not be that unless there was a little of everything in them. I suspect
thou wilt say that I am taking a very humble line, and keeping myself
too much within the bounds of my moderation, from a feeling that
additional suffering should not be inflicted upon a sufferer, and that
what this gentleman has to endure must doubtless be very great, as he
does not dare to come out into the open field and broad daylight, but
hides his name and disguises his country as if he had been guilty of
some lese majesty. If perchance thou shouldst come to know him, tell
him from me that I do not hold myself aggrieved; for I know well what
the temptations of the devil are, and that one of the greatest is
putting it into a man's head that he can write and print a book by
which he will get as much fame as money, and as much money as fame;
and to prove it I will beg of you, in your own sprightly, pleasant
way, to tell him this story. There was a madman in Seville who took to
one of the drollest absurdities and vagaries that ever madman in the
world gave way to. It was this: he made a tube of reed sharp at one
end, and catching a dog in the street, or wherever it might be, he
with his foot held one of its legs fast, and with his hand lifted up
the other, and as best he could fixed the tube where, by blowing, he
made the dog as round as a ball; then holding it in this position, he
gave it a couple of slaps on the belly, and let it go, saying to the
bystanders (and there were always plenty of them): "Do your worships
think, now, that it is an easy thing to write a book? And if this
story does not suit him, you may, dear reader, tell him this one,
which is likewise of a madman and a dog. In Cordova there was another
madman, whose way it was to carry a piece of marble slab or a stone,
not of the lightest, on his head, and when he came upon any unwary dog
he used to draw close to him and let the weight fall right on top of
him; on which the dog in a rage, barking and howling, would run three
streets without stopping. It so happened, however, that one of the
dogs he discharged his load upon was a cap-maker's dog, of which his
master was very fond. The stone came down hitting it on the head, the
dog raised a yell at the blow, the master saw the affair and was
wroth, and snatching up a measuring-yard rushed out at the madman and
did not leave a sound bone in his body, and at every stroke he gave
him he said, "You dog, you thief! my lurcher! Don't you see, you
brute, that my dog is a lurcher?" and so, repeating the word "lurcher"
again and again, he sent the madman away beaten to a jelly. The madman
took the lesson to heart, and vanished, and for more than a month
never once showed himself in public; but after that he came out again
with his old trick and a heavier load than ever. He came up to where
there was a dog, and examining it very carefully without venturing to
let the stone fall, he said: "This is a lurcher; ware!" In short, all
the dogs he came across, be they mastiffs or terriers, he said were
lurchers; and he discharged no more stones. Maybe it will be the same
with this historian; that he will not venture another time to
discharge the weight of his wit in books, which, being bad, are harder
than stones. Tell him, too, that I do not care a farthing for the
threat he holds out to me of depriving me of my profit by means of his
book; for, to borrow from the famous interlude of "The Perendenga," I
say in answer to him, "Long life to my lord the Veintiquatro, and
Christ be with us all." Long life to the great Conde de Lemos, whose
Christian charity and well-known generosity support me against all the
strokes of my curst fortune; and long life to the supreme benevolence
of His Eminence of Toledo, Don Bernardo de Sandoval y Rojas; and what
matter if there be no printing-presses in the world, or if they print
more books against me than there are letters in the verses of Mingo
Revulgo! These two princes, unsought by any adulation or flattery of
mine, of their own goodness alone, have taken it upon them to show me
kindness and protect me, and in this I consider myself happier and
richer than if Fortune had raised me to her greatest height in the
ordinary way. The poor man may retain honour, but not the vicious;
poverty may cast a cloud over nobility, but cannot hide it altogether;
and as virtue of itself sheds a certain light, even though it be
through the straits and chinks of penury, it wins the esteem of lofty
and noble spirits, and in consequence their protection. Thou needst
say no more to him, nor will I say anything more to thee, save to tell
thee to bear in mind that this Second Part of "Don Quixote" which I
offer thee is cut by the same craftsman and from the same cloth as the
First, and that in it I present thee Don Quixote continued, and at
length dead and buried, so that no one may dare to bring forward any
further evidence against him, for that already produced is sufficient;
and suffice it, too, that some reputable person should have given an
account of all these shrewd lunacies of his without going into the
matter again; for abundance, even of good things, prevents them from
being valued; and scarcity, even in the case of what is bad, confers a
certain value. I was forgetting to tell thee that thou mayest expect
the "Persiles," which I am now finishing, and also the Second Part of
"Galatea." CHAPTER I. OF THE INTERVIEW THE CURATE AND THE BARBER HAD
WITH DON QUIXOTE ABOUT HIS MALADY Cide Hamete Benengeli, in the Second
Part of this history, and third sally of Don Quixote, says that the
curate and the barber remained nearly a month without seeing him, lest
they should recall or bring back to his recollection what had taken
place. They did not, however, omit to visit his niece and housekeeper,
and charge them to be careful to treat him with attention, and give
him comforting things to eat, and such as were good for the heart and
the brain, whence, it was plain to see, all his misfortune proceeded.
The niece and housekeeper replied that they did so, and meant to do so
with all possible care and assiduity, for they could perceive that
their master was now and then beginning to show signs of being in his
right mind. This gave great satisfaction to the curate and the barber,
for they concluded they had taken the right course in carrying him off
enchanted on the ox-cart, as has been described in the First Part of
this great as well as accurate history, in the last chapter thereof.
So they resolved to pay him a visit and test the improvement in his
condition, although they thought it almost impossible that there could
be any; and they agreed not to touch upon any point connected with
knight-errantry so as not to run the risk of reopening wounds which
were still so tender. They came to see him consequently, and found him
sitting up in bed in a green baize waistcoat and a red Toledo cap, and
so withered and dried up that he looked as if he had been turned into
a mummy. They were very cordially received by him; they asked him
after his health, and he talked to them about himself very naturally
and in very well-chosen language. In the course of their conversation
they fell to discussing what they call State-craft and systems of
government, correcting this abuse and condemning that, reforming one
practice and abolishing another, each of the three setting up for a
new legislator, a modern Lycurgus, or a brand-new Solon; and so
completely did they remodel the State, that they seemed to have thrust
it into a furnace and taken out something quite different from what
they had put in; and on all the subjects they dealt with, Don Quixote
spoke with such good sense that the pair of examiners were fully
convinced that he was quite recovered and in his full senses. The
niece and housekeeper were present at the conversation and could not
find words enough to express their thanks to God at seeing their
master so clear in his mind; the curate, however, changing his
original plan, which was to avoid touching upon matters of chivalry,
resolved to test Don Quixote's recovery thoroughly, and see whether it
were genuine or not; and so, from one subject to another, he came at
last to talk of the news that had come from the capital, and, among
other things, he said it was considered certain that the Turk was
coming down with a powerful fleet, and that no one knew what his
purpose was, or when the great storm would burst; and that all
Christendom was in apprehension of this, which almost every year calls
us to arms, and that his Majesty had made provision for the security
of the coasts of Naples and Sicily and the island of Malta. To this
Don Quixote replied, "His Majesty has acted like a prudent warrior in
providing for the safety of his realms in time, so that the enemy may
not find him unprepared; but if my advice were taken I would recommend
him to adopt a measure which at present, no doubt, his Majesty is very
far from thinking of." The moment the curate heard this he said to
himself, "God keep thee in his hand, poor Don Quixote, for it seems to
me thou art precipitating thyself from the height of thy madness into
the profound abyss of thy simplicity." But the barber, who had the
same suspicion as the curate, asked Don Quixote what would be his
advice as to the measures that he said ought to be adopted; for
perhaps it might prove to be one that would have to be added to the
list of the many impertinent suggestions that people were in the habit
of offering to princes. "Mine, master shaver," said Don Quixote, "will
not be impertinent, but, on the contrary, pertinent." "I don't mean
that," said the barber, "but that experience has shown that all or
most of the expedients which are proposed to his Majesty are either
impossible, or absurd, or injurious to the King and to the kingdom."
"Mine, however," replied Don Quixote, "is neither impossible nor
absurd, but the easiest, the most reasonable, the readiest and most
expeditious that could suggest itself to any projector's mind." "You
take a long time to tell it, Senor Don Quixote," said the curate. "I
don't choose to tell it here, now," said Don Quixote, "and have it
reach the ears of the lords of the council to-morrow morning, and some
other carry off the thanks and rewards of my trouble." "For my part,"
said the barber, "I give my word here and before God that I will not
repeat what your worship says, to King, Rook or earthly man--an oath I
learned from the ballad of the curate, who, in the prelude, told the
king of the thief who had robbed him of the hundred gold crowns and
his pacing mule." "I am not versed in stories," said Don Quixote; "but
I know the oath is a good one, because I know the barber to be an
honest fellow." "Even if he were not," said the curate, "I will go
bail and answer for him that in this matter he will be as silent as a
dummy, under pain of paying any penalty that may be pronounced." "And
who will be security for you, senor curate?" said Don Quixote. "My
profession," replied the curate, "which is to keep secrets." "Ods
body!" said Don Quixote at this, "what more has his Majesty to do but
to command, by public proclamation, all the knights-errant that are
scattered over Spain to assemble on a fixed day in the capital, for
even if no more than half a dozen come, there may be one among them
who alone will suffice to destroy the entire might of the Turk. Give
me your attention and follow me. Is it, pray, any new thing for a
single knight-errant to demolish an army of two hundred thousand men,
as if they all had but one throat or were made of sugar paste? Nay,
tell me, how many histories are there filled with these marvels? If
only (in an evil hour for me: I don't speak for anyone else) the
famous Don Belianis were alive now, or any one of the innumerable
progeny of Amadis of Gaul! If any these were alive today, and were to
come face to face with the Turk, by my faith, I would not give much
for the Turk's chance. But God will have regard for his people, and
will provide some one, who, if not so valiant as the knights-errant of
yore, at least will not be inferior to them in spirit; but God knows
what I mean, and I say no more." "Alas!" exclaimed the niece at this,
"may I die if my master does not want to turn knight-errant again;" to
which Don Quixote replied, "A knight-errant I shall die, and let the
Turk come down or go up when he likes, and in as strong force as he
can, once more I say, God knows what I mean." But here the barber
said, "I ask your worships to give me leave to retire to bed, and to
place and retain me among the number of your greatest friends and
servants." "And me too," said Sancho; "maybe I'll be good for
something." With this they exchanged farewells, and Don Quixote and
Sancho retired to their room, leaving Don Juan and Don Jeronimo amazed
to see the medley he made of his good sense and his craziness; and
they felt thoroughly convinced that these, and not those their
Aragonese author described, were the genuine Don Quixote and Sancho.
Don Quixote rose betimes, and bade adieu to his hosts by knocking at
the partition of the other room. Sancho paid the landlord
magnificently, and recommended him either to say less about the
providing of his inn or to keep it better provided. CHAPTER LX. OF
WHAT HAPPENED DON QUIXOTE ON HIS WAY TO BARCELONA It was a fresh
morning giving promise of a cool day as Don Quixote quitted the inn,
first of all taking care to ascertain the most direct road to
Barcelona without touching upon Saragossa; so anxious was he to make
out this new historian, who they said abused him so, to be a liar.
Well, as it fell out, nothing worthy of being recorded happened him
for six days, at the end of which, having turned aside out of the
road, he was overtaken by night in a thicket of oak or cork trees; for
on this point Cide Hamete is not as precise as he usually is on other
matters. Master and man dismounted from their beasts, and as soon as
they had settled themselves at the foot of the trees, Sancho, who had
had a good noontide meal that day, let himself, without more ado, pass
the gates of sleep. But Don Quixote, whom his thoughts, far more than
hunger, kept awake, could not close an eye, and roamed in fancy to and
fro through all sorts of places. At one moment it seemed to him that
he was in the cave of Montesinos and saw Dulcinea, transformed into a
country wench, skipping and mounting upon her she-ass; again that the
words of the sage Merlin were sounding in his ears, setting forth the
conditions to be observed and the exertions to be made for the
disenchantment of Dulcinea. He lost all patience when he considered
the laziness and want of charity of his squire Sancho; for to the best
of his belief he had only given himself five lashes, a number paltry
and disproportioned to the vast number required. At this thought he
felt such vexation and anger that he reasoned the matter thus: "If
Alexander the Great cut the Gordian knot, saying, 'To cut comes to the
same thing as to untie,' and yet did not fail to become lord paramount
of all Asia, neither more nor less could happen now in Dulcinea's
disenchantment if I scourge Sancho against his will; for, if it is the
condition of the remedy that Sancho shall receive three thousand and
odd lashes, what does it matter to me whether he inflicts them
himself, or some one else inflicts them, when the essential point is
that he receives them, let them come from whatever quarter they may?"
With this idea he went over to Sancho, having first taken Rocinante's
reins and arranged them so as to be able to flog him with them, and
began to untie the points (the common belief is he had but one in
front) by which his breeches were held up; but the instant he
approached him Sancho woke up in his full senses and cried out, "What
is this? Who is touching me and untrussing me?" "It is I," said Don
Quixote, "and I come to make good thy shortcomings and relieve my own
distresses; I come to whip thee, Sancho, and wipe off some portion of
the debt thou hast undertaken. Dulcinea is perishing, thou art living
on regardless, I am dying of hope deferred; therefore untruss thyself
with a good will, for mine it is, here, in this retired spot, to give
thee at least two thousand lashes." "Not a bit of it," said Sancho;
"let your worship keep quiet, or else by the living God the deaf shall
hear us; the lashes I pledged myself to must be voluntary and not
forced upon me, and just now I have no fancy to whip myself; it is
enough if I give you my word to flog and flap myself when I have a
mind." "It will not do to leave it to thy courtesy, Sancho," said Don
Quixote, "for thou art hard of heart and, though a clown, tender of
flesh;" and at the same time he strove and struggled to untie him.
Seeing this Sancho got up, and grappling with his master he gripped
him with all his might in his arms, giving him a trip with the heel
stretched him on the ground on his back, and pressing his right knee
on his chest held his hands in his own so that he could neither move
nor breathe. "How now, traitor!" exclaimed Don Quixote. "Dost thou
revolt against thy master and natural lord? Dost thou rise against him
who gives thee his bread?" "I neither put down king, nor set up king,"
said Sancho; "I only stand up for myself who am my own lord; if your
worship promises me to be quiet, and not to offer to whip me now, I'll
let you go free and unhindered; if not-- Traitor and Dona Sancha's
foe, Thou diest on the spot." Don Quixote gave his promise, and swore
by the life of his thoughts not to touch so much as a hair of his
garments, and to leave him entirely free and to his own discretion to
whip himself whenever he pleased. Sancho rose and removed some
distance from the spot, but as he was about to place himself leaning
against another tree he felt something touch his head, and putting up
his hands encountered somebody's two feet with shoes and stockings on
them. He trembled with fear and made for another tree, where the very
same thing happened to him, and he fell a-shouting, calling upon Don
Quixote to come and protect him. Don Quixote did so, and asked him
what had happened to him, and what he was afraid of. Sancho replied
that all the trees were full of men's feet and legs. Don Quixote felt
them, and guessed at once what it was, and said to Sancho, "Thou hast
nothing to be afraid of, for these feet and legs that thou feelest but
canst not see belong no doubt to some outlaws and freebooters that
have been hanged on these trees; for the authorities in these parts
are wont to hang them up by twenties and thirties when they catch
them; whereby I conjecture that I must be near Barcelona;" and it was,
in fact, as he supposed; with the first light they looked up and saw
that the fruit hanging on those trees were freebooters' bodies. And
now day dawned; and if the dead freebooters had scared them, their
hearts were no less troubled by upwards of forty living ones, who all
of a sudden surrounded them, and in the Catalan tongue bade them stand
and wait until their captain came up. Don Quixote was on foot with his
horse unbridled and his lance leaning against a tree, and in short
completely defenceless; he thought it best therefore to fold his arms
and bow his head and reserve himself for a more favourable occasion
and opportunity. The robbers made haste to search Dapple, and did not
leave him a single thing of all he carried in the alforjas and in the
valise; and lucky it was for Sancho that the duke's crowns and those
he brought from home were in a girdle that he wore round him; but for
all that these good folk would have stripped him, and even looked to
see what he had hidden between the skin and flesh, but for the arrival
at that moment of their captain, who was about thirty-four years of
age apparently, strongly built, above the middle height, of stern
aspect and swarthy complexion. He was mounted upon a powerful horse,
and had on a coat of mail, with four of the pistols they call
petronels in that country at his waist. He saw that his squires (for
so they call those who follow that trade) were about to rifle Sancho
Panza, but he ordered them to desist and was at once obeyed, so the
girdle escaped. He wondered to see the lance leaning against the tree,
the shield on the ground, and Don Quixote in armour and dejected, with
the saddest and most melancholy face that sadness itself could
produce; and going up to him he said, "Be not so cast down, good man,
for you have not fallen into the hands of any inhuman Busiris, but
into Roque Guinart's, which are more merciful than cruel." "The cause
of my dejection," returned Don Quixote, "is not that I have fallen
into thy hands, O valiant Roque, whose fame is bounded by no limits on
earth, but that my carelessness should have been so great that thy
soldiers should have caught me unbridled, when it is my duty,
according to the rule of knight-errantry which I profess, to be always
on the alert and at all times my own sentinel; for let me tell thee,
great Roque, had they found me on my horse, with my lance and shield,
it would not have been very easy for them to reduce me to submission,
for I am Don Quixote of La Mancha, he who hath filled the whole world
with his achievements." Roque Guinart at once perceived that Don
Quixote's weakness was more akin to madness than to swagger; and
though he had sometimes heard him spoken of, he never regarded the
things attributed to him as true, nor could he persuade himself that
such a humour could become dominant in the heart of man; he was
extremely glad, therefore, to meet him and test at close quarters what
he had heard of him at a distance; so he said to him, "Despair not,
valiant knight, nor regard as an untoward fate the position in which
thou findest thyself; it may be that by these slips thy crooked
fortune will make itself straight; for heaven by strange circuitous
ways, mysterious and incomprehensible to man, raises up the fallen and
makes rich the poor." Don Quixote was about to thank him, when they
heard behind them a noise as of a troop of horses; there was, however,
but one, riding on which at a furious pace came a youth, apparently
about twenty years of age, clad in green damask edged with gold and
breeches and a loose frock, with a hat looped up in the Walloon
fashion, tight-fitting polished boots, gilt spurs, dagger and sword,
and in his hand a musketoon, and a pair of pistols at his waist. Roque
turned round at the noise and perceived this comely figure, which
drawing near thus addressed him, "I came in quest of thee, valiant
Roque, to find in thee if not a remedy at least relief in my
misfortune; and not to keep thee in suspense, for I see thou dost not
recognise me, I will tell thee who I am; I am Claudia Jeronima, the
daughter of Simon Forte, thy good friend, and special enemy of
Clauquel Torrellas, who is thine also as being of the faction opposed
to thee. Thou knowest that this Torrellas has a son who is called, or
at least was not two hours since, Don Vicente Torrellas. Well, to cut
short the tale of my misfortune, I will tell thee in a few words what
this youth has brought upon me. He saw me, he paid court to me, I
listened to him, and, unknown to my father, I loved him; for there is
no woman, however secluded she may live or close she may be kept, who
will not have opportunities and to spare for following her headlong
impulses. In a word, he pledged himself to be mine, and I promised to
be his, without carrying matters any further. Yesterday I learned
that, forgetful of his pledge to me, he was about to marry another,
and that he was to go this morning to plight his troth, intelligence
which overwhelmed and exasperated me; my father not being at home I
was able to adopt this costume you see, and urging my horse to speed I
overtook Don Vicente about a league from this, and without waiting to
utter reproaches or hear excuses I fired this musket at him, and these
two pistols besides, and to the best of my belief I must have lodged
more than two bullets in his body, opening doors to let my honour go
free, enveloped in his blood. I left him there in the hands of his
servants, who did not dare and were not able to interfere in his
defence, and I come to seek from thee a safe-conduct into France,
where I have relatives with whom I can live; and also to implore thee
to protect my father, so that Don Vicente's numerous kinsmen may not
venture to wreak their lawless vengeance upon him." Roque, filled with
admiration at the gallant bearing, high spirit, comely figure, and
adventure of the fair Claudia, said to her, "Come, senora, let us go
and see if thy enemy is dead; and then we will consider what will be
best for thee." Don Quixote, who had been listening to what Claudia
said and Roque Guinart said in reply to her, exclaimed, "Nobody need
trouble himself with the defence of this lady, for I take it upon
myself. Give me my horse and arms, and wait for me here; I will go in
quest of this knight, and dead or alive I will make him keep his word
plighted to so great beauty." "Nobody need have any doubt about that,"
said Sancho, "for my master has a very happy knack of matchmaking;
it's not many days since he forced another man to marry, who in the
same way backed out of his promise to another maiden; and if it had
not been for his persecutors the enchanters changing the man's proper
shape into a lacquey's the said maiden would not be one this minute."
Roque, who was paying more attention to the fair Claudia's adventure
than to the words of master or man, did not hear them; and ordering
his squires to restore to Sancho everything they had stripped Dapple
of, he directed them to return to the place where they had been
quartered during the night, and then set off with Claudia at full
speed in search of the wounded or slain Don Vicente. They reached the
spot where Claudia met him, but found nothing there save freshly spilt
blood; looking all round, however, they descried some people on the
slope of a hill above them, and concluded, as indeed it proved to be,
that it was Don Vicente, whom either dead or alive his servants were
removing to attend to his wounds or to bury him. They made haste to
overtake them, which, as the party moved slowly, they were able to do
with ease. They found Don Vicente in the arms of his servants, whom he
was entreating in a broken feeble voice to leave him there to die, as
the pain of his wounds would not suffer him to go any farther. Claudia
and Roque threw themselves off their horses and advanced towards him;
the servants were overawed by the appearance of Roque, and Claudia was
moved by the sight of Don Vicente, and going up to him half tenderly
half sternly, she seized his hand and said to him, "Hadst thou given
me this according to our compact thou hadst never come to this pass."
The wounded gentleman opened his all but closed eyes, and recognising
Claudia said, "I see clearly, fair and mistaken lady, that it is thou
that hast slain me, a punishment not merited or deserved by my
feelings towards thee, for never did I mean to, nor could I, wrong
thee in thought or deed." "It is not true, then," said Claudia, "that
thou wert going this morning to marry Leonora the daughter of the rich
Balvastro?" "Assuredly not," replied Don Vicente; "my cruel fortune
must have carried those tidings to thee to drive thee in thy jealousy
to take my life; and to assure thyself of this, press my hands and
take me for thy husband if thou wilt; I have no better satisfaction to
offer thee for the wrong thou fanciest thou hast received from me."
Claudia wrung his hands, and her own heart was so wrung that she lay
fainting on the bleeding breast of Don Vicente, whom a death spasm
seized the same instant. Roque was in perplexity and knew not what to
do; the servants ran to fetch water to sprinkle their faces, and
brought some and bathed them with it. Claudia recovered from her
fainting fit, but not so Don Vicente from the paroxysm that had
overtaken him, for his life had come to an end. On perceiving this,
Claudia, when she had convinced herself that her beloved husband was
no more, rent the air with her sighs and made the heavens ring with
her lamentations; she tore her hair and scattered it to the winds, she
beat her face with her hands and showed all the signs of grief and
sorrow that could be conceived to come from an afflicted heart.
"Cruel, reckless woman!" she cried, "how easily wert thou moved to
carry out a thought so wicked! O furious force of jealousy, to what
desperate lengths dost thou lead those that give thee lodging in their
bosoms! O husband, whose unhappy fate in being mine hath borne thee
from the marriage bed to the grave!" So vehement and so piteous were
the lamentations of Claudia that they drew tears from Roque's eyes,
unused as they were to shed them on any occasion. The servants wept,
Claudia swooned away again and again, and the whole place seemed a
field of sorrow and an abode of misfortune. In the end Roque Guinart
directed Don Vicente's servants to carry his body to his father's
village, which was close by, for burial. Claudia told him she meant to
go to a monastery of which an aunt of hers was abbess, where she
intended to pass her life with a better and everlasting spouse. He
applauded her pious resolution, and offered to accompany her
whithersoever she wished, and to protect her father against the
kinsmen of Don Vicente and all the world, should they seek to injure
him. Claudia would not on any account allow him to speak until he had
risen. The prodigious scarecrow obeyed, and standing up, removed the
veil from his face and disclosed the most enormous, the longest, the
whitest and the thickest beard that human eyes had ever beheld until
that moment, and then fetching up a grave, sonorous voice from the
depths of his broad, capacious chest, and fixing his eyes on the duke,
he said: "Most high and mighty senor, my name is Trifaldin of the
White Beard; I am squire to the Countess Trifaldi, otherwise called
the Distressed Duenna, on whose behalf I bear a message to your
highness, which is that your magnificence will be pleased to grant her
leave and permission to come and tell you her trouble, which is one of
the strangest and most wonderful that the mind most familiar with
trouble in the world could have imagined; but first she desires to
know if the valiant and never vanquished knight, Don Quixote of La
Mancha, is in this your castle, for she has come in quest of him on
foot and without breaking her fast from the kingdom of Kandy to your
realms here; a thing which may and ought to be regarded as a miracle
or set down to enchantment; she is even now at the gate of this
fortress or plaisance, and only waits for your permission to enter. I
have spoken." And with that he coughed, and stroked down his beard
with both his hands, and stood very tranquilly waiting for the
response of the duke, which was to this effect: "Many days ago, worthy
squire Trifaldin of the White Beard, we heard of the misfortune of my
lady the Countess Trifaldi, whom the enchanters have caused to be
called the Distressed Duenna. Bid her enter, O stupendous squire, and
tell her that the valiant knight Don Quixote of La Mancha is here, and
from his generous disposition she may safely promise herself every
protection and assistance; and you may tell her, too, that if my aid
be necessary it will not be withheld, for I am bound to give it to her
by my quality of knight, which involves the protection of women of all
sorts, especially widowed, wronged, and distressed dames, such as her
ladyship seems to be." On hearing this Trifaldin bent the knee to the
ground, and making a sign to the fifer and drummers to strike up, he
turned and marched out of the garden to the same notes and at the same
pace as when he entered, leaving them all amazed at his bearing and
solemnity. Turning to Don Quixote, the duke said, "After all, renowned
knight, the mists of malice and ignorance are unable to hide or
obscure the light of valour and virtue. I say so, because your
excellence has been barely six days in this castle, and already the
unhappy and the afflicted come in quest of you from lands far distant
and remote, and not in coaches or on dromedaries, but on foot and
fasting, confident that in that mighty arm they will find a cure for
their sorrows and troubles; thanks to your great achievements, which
are circulated all over the known earth." "I wish, senor duke,"
replied Don Quixote, "that blessed ecclesiastic, who at table the
other day showed such ill-will and bitter spite against
knights-errant, were here now to see with his own eyes whether knights
of the sort are needed in the world; he would at any rate learn by
experience that those suffering any extraordinary affliction or
sorrow, in extreme cases and unusual misfortunes do not go to look for
a remedy to the houses of jurists or village sacristans, or to the
knight who has never attempted to pass the bounds of his own town, or
to the indolent courtier who only seeks for news to repeat and talk
of, instead of striving to do deeds and exploits for others to relate
and record. Relief in distress, help in need, protection for damsels,
consolation for widows, are to be found in no sort of persons better
than in knights-errant; and I give unceasing thanks to heaven that I
am one, and regard any misfortune or suffering that may befall me in
the pursuit of so honourable a calling as endured to good purpose. Let
this duenna come and ask what she will, for I will effect her relief
by the might of my arm and the dauntless resolution of my bold heart."
CHAPTER XXXVII. WHEREIN IS CONTINUED THE NOTABLE ADVENTURE OF THE
DISTRESSED DUENNA The duke and duchess were extremely glad to see how
readily Don Quixote fell in with their scheme; but at this moment
Sancho observed, "I hope this senora duenna won't be putting any
difficulties in the way of the promise of my government; for I have
heard a Toledo apothecary, who talked like a goldfinch, say that where
duennas were mixed up nothing good could happen. God bless me, how he
hated them, that same apothecary! And so what I'm thinking is, if all
duennas, of whatever sort or condition they may be, are plagues and
busybodies, what must they be that are distressed, like this Countess
Three-skirts or Three-tails!--for in my country skirts or tails, tails
or skirts, it's all one." "Hush, friend Sancho," said Don Quixote;
"since this lady duenna comes in quest of me from such a distant land
she cannot be one of those the apothecary meant; moreover this is a
countess, and when countesses serve as duennas it is in the service of
queens and empresses, for in their own houses they are mistresses
paramount and have other duennas to wait on them." To this Dona
Rodriguez, who was present, made answer, "My lady the duchess has
duennas in her service that might be countesses if it was the will of
fortune; 'but laws go as kings like;' let nobody speak ill of duennas,
above all of ancient maiden ones; for though I am not one myself, I
know and am aware of the advantage a maiden duenna has over one that
is a widow; but 'he who clipped us has kept the scissors.'" "For all
that," said Sancho, "there's so much to be clipped about duennas, so
my barber said, that 'it will be better not to stir the rice even
though it sticks.'" "These squires," returned Dona Rodriguez, "are
always our enemies; and as they are the haunting spirits of the
antechambers and watch us at every step, whenever they are not saying
their prayers (and that's often enough) they spend their time in
tattling about us, digging up our bones and burying our good name. But
I can tell these walking blocks that we will live in spite of them,
and in great houses too, though we die of hunger and cover our flesh,
be it delicate or not, with widow's weeds, as one covers or hides a
dunghill on a procession day. By my faith, if it were permitted me and
time allowed, I could prove, not only to those here present, but to
all the world, that there is no virtue that is not to be found in a
duenna." "I have no doubt," said the duchess, "that my good Dona
Rodriguez is right, and very much so; but she had better bide her time
for fighting her own battle and that of the rest of the duennas, so as
to crush the calumny of that vile apothecary, and root out the
prejudice in the great Sancho Panza's mind." To which Sancho replied,
"Ever since I have sniffed the governorship I have got rid of the
humours of a squire, and I don't care a wild fig for all the duennas
in the world." They would have carried on this duenna dispute further
had they not heard the notes of the fife and drums once more, from
which they concluded that the Distressed Duenna was making her
entrance. The duchess asked the duke if it would be proper to go out
to receive her, as she was a countess and a person of rank. "In
respect of her being a countess," said Sancho, before the duke could
reply, "I am for your highnesses going out to receive her; but in
respect of her being a duenna, it is my opinion you should not stir a
step." "Who bade thee meddle in this, Sancho?" said Don Quixote. "Who,
senor?" said Sancho; "I meddle for I have a right to meddle, as a
squire who has learned the rules of courtesy in the school of your
worship, the most courteous and best-bred knight in the whole world of
courtliness; and in these things, as I have heard your worship say, as
much is lost by a card too many as by a card too few, and to one who
has his ears open, few words." "Sancho is right," said the duke;
"we'll see what the countess is like, and by that measure the courtesy
that is due to her." And now the drums and fife made their entrance as
before; and here the author brought this short chapter to an end and
began the next, following up the same adventure, which is one of the
most notable in the history. CHAPTER XXXVIII. WHEREIN IS TOLD THE
DISTRESSED DUENNA'S TALE OF HER MISFORTUNES Following the melancholy
musicians there filed into the garden as many as twelve duennas, in
two lines, all dressed in ample mourning robes apparently of milled
serge, with hoods of fine white gauze so long that they allowed only
the border of the robe to be seen. Behind them came the Countess
Trifaldi, the squire Trifaldin of the White Beard leading her by the
hand, clad in the finest unnapped black baize, such that, had it a
nap, every tuft would have shown as big as a Martos chickpea; the
tail, or skirt, or whatever it might be called, ended in three points
which were borne up by the hands of three pages, likewise dressed in
mourning, forming an elegant geometrical figure with the three acute
angles made by the three points, from which all who saw the peaked
skirt concluded that it must be because of it the countess was called
Trifaldi, as though it were Countess of the Three Skirts; and
Benengeli says it was so, and that by her right name she was called
the Countess Lobuna, because wolves bred in great numbers in her
country; and if, instead of wolves, they had been foxes, she would
have been called the Countess Zorruna, as it was the custom in those
parts for lords to take distinctive titles from the thing or things
most abundant in their dominions; this countess, however, in honour of
the new fashion of her skirt, dropped Lobuna and took up Trifaldi. The
twelve duennas and the lady came on at procession pace, their faces
being covered with black veils, not transparent ones like Trifaldin's,
but so close that they allowed nothing to be seen through them. As
soon as the band of duennas was fully in sight, the duke, the duchess,
and Don Quixote stood up, as well as all who were watching the
slow-moving procession. The twelve duennas halted and formed a lane,
along which the Distressed One advanced, Trifaldin still holding her
hand. On seeing this the duke, the duchess, and Don Quixote went some
twelve paces forward to meet her. She then, kneeling on the ground,
said in a voice hoarse and rough, rather than fine and delicate, "May
it please your highnesses not to offer such courtesies to this your
servant, I should say to this your handmaid, for I am in such distress
that I shall never be able to make a proper return, because my strange
and unparalleled misfortune has carried off my wits, and I know not
whither; but it must be a long way off, for the more I look for them
the less I find them." "He would be wanting in wits, senora countess,"
said the duke, "who did not perceive your worth by your person, for at
a glance it may be seen it deserves all the cream of courtesy and
flower of polite usage;" and raising her up by the hand he led her to
a seat beside the duchess, who likewise received her with great
urbanity. Don Quixote remained silent, while Sancho was dying to see
the features of Trifaldi and one or two of her many duennas; but there
was no possibility of it until they themselves displayed them of their
own accord and free will. All kept still, waiting to see who would
break silence, which the Distressed Duenna did in these words: "I am
confident, most mighty lord, most fair lady, and most discreet
company, that my most miserable misery will be accorded a reception no
less dispassionate than generous and condolent in your most valiant
bosoms, for it is one that is enough to melt marble, soften diamonds,
and mollify the steel of the most hardened hearts in the world; but
ere it is proclaimed to your hearing, not to say your ears, I would
fain be enlightened whether there be present in this society, circle,
or company, that knight immaculatissimus, Don Quixote de la
Manchissima, and his squirissimus Panza." "The Panza is here," said
Sancho, before anyone could reply, "and Don Quixotissimus too; and so,
most distressedest Duenissima, you may say what you willissimus, for
we are all readissimus to do you any servissimus." On this Don Quixote
rose, and addressing the Distressed Duenna, said, "If your sorrows,
afflicted lady, can indulge in any hope of relief from the valour or
might of any knight-errant, here are mine, which, feeble and limited
though they be, shall be entirely devoted to your service. I am Don
Quixote of La Mancha, the one that fame speaks of, and not the unlucky
one that has attempted to usurp my name and deck himself out in my
ideas. I entreat your worship by your devoir as a gentleman to be so
good as to make a declaration before the alcalde of this village that
you never in all your life saw me until now, and that neither am I the
Don Quixote in print in the Second Part, nor this Sancho Panza, my
squire, the one your worship knew." "That I will do most willingly,"
replied Don Alvaro; "though it amazes me to find two Don Quixotes and
two Sancho Panzas at once, as much alike in name as they differ in
demeanour; and again I say and declare that what I saw I cannot have
seen, and that what happened me cannot have happened." "No doubt your
worship is enchanted, like my lady Dulcinea del Toboso," said Sancho;
"and would to heaven your disenchantment rested on my giving myself
another three thousand and odd lashes like what I'm giving myself for
her, for I'd lay them on without looking for anything." "I don't
understand that about the lashes," said Don Alvaro. Sancho replied
that it was a long story to tell, but he would tell him if they
happened to be going the same road. By this dinner-time arrived, and
Don Quixote and Don Alvaro dined together. The alcalde of the village
came by chance into the inn together with a notary, and Don Quixote
laid a petition before him, showing that it was requisite for his
rights that Don Alvaro Tarfe, the gentleman there present, should make
a declaration before him that he did not know Don Quixote of La
Mancha, also there present, and that he was not the one that was in
print in a history entitled "Second Part of Don Quixote of La Mancha,
by one Avellaneda of Tordesillas." The alcalde finally put it in legal
form, and the declaration was made with all the formalities required
in such cases, at which Don Quixote and Sancho were in high delight,
as if a declaration of the sort was of any great importance to them,
and as if their words and deeds did not plainly show the difference
between the two Don Quixotes and the two Sanchos. Many civilities and
offers of service were exchanged by Don Alvaro and Don Quixote, in the
course of which the great Manchegan displayed such good taste that he
disabused Don Alvaro of the error he was under; and he, on his part,
felt convinced he must have been enchanted, now that he had been
brought in contact with two such opposite Don Quixotes. Evening came,
they set out from the village, and after about half a league two roads
branched off, one leading to Don Quixote's village, the other the road
Don Alvaro was to follow. In this short interval Don Quixote told him
of his unfortunate defeat, and of Dulcinea's enchantment and the
remedy, all which threw Don Alvaro into fresh amazement, and embracing
Don Quixote and Sancho he went his way, and Don Quixote went his. That
night he passed among trees again in order to give Sancho an
opportunity of working out his penance, which he did in the same
fashion as the night before, at the expense of the bark of the beech
trees much more than of his back, of which he took such good care that
the lashes would not have knocked off a fly had there been one there.
The duped Don Quixote did not miss a single stroke of the count, and
he found that together with those of the night before they made up
three thousand and twenty-nine. The sun apparently had got up early to
witness the sacrifice, and with his light they resumed their journey,
discussing the deception practised on Don Alvaro, and saying how well
done it was to have taken his declaration before a magistrate in such
an unimpeachable form. That day and night they travelled on, nor did
anything worth mention happen them, unless it was that in the course
of the night Sancho finished off his task, whereat Don Quixote was
beyond measure joyful. He watched for daylight, to see if along the
road he should fall in with his already disenchanted lady Dulcinea;
and as he pursued his journey there was no woman he met that he did
not go up to, to see if she was Dulcinea del Toboso, as he held it
absolutely certain that Merlin's promises could not lie. Full of these
thoughts and anxieties, they ascended a rising ground wherefrom they
descried their own village, at the sight of which Sancho fell on his
knees exclaiming, "Open thine eyes, longed-for home, and see how thy
son Sancho Panza comes back to thee, if not very rich, very well
whipped! Open thine arms and receive, too, thy son Don Quixote, who,
if he comes vanquished by the arm of another, comes victor over
himself, which, as he himself has told me, is the greatest victory
anyone can desire. I'm bringing back money, for if I was well whipped,
I went mounted like a gentleman." "Have done with these fooleries,"
said Don Quixote; "let us push on straight and get to our own place,
where we will give free range to our fancies, and settle our plans for
our future pastoral life." With this they descended the slope and
directed their steps to their village. CHAPTER LXXIII. OF THE OMENS
DON QUIXOTE HAD AS HE ENTERED HIS OWN VILLAGE, AND OTHER INCIDENTS
THAT EMBELLISH AND GIVE A COLOUR TO THIS GREAT HISTORY CHAPTER LXXIV
OF HOW DON QUIXOTE FELL SICK, AND OF THE WILL HE MADE, AND HOW HE DIED
As nothing that is man's can last for ever, but all tends ever
downwards from its beginning to its end, and above all man's life, and
as Don Quixote's enjoyed no special dispensation from heaven to stay
its course, its end and close came when he least looked for it.
For-whether it was of the dejection the thought of his defeat
produced, or of heaven's will that so ordered it--a fever settled upon
him and kept him in his bed for six days, during which he was often
visited by his friends the curate, the bachelor, and the barber, while
his good squire Sancho Panza never quitted his bedside. They,
persuaded that it was grief at finding himself vanquished, and the
object of his heart, the liberation and disenchantment of Dulcinea,
unattained, that kept him in this state, strove by all the means in
their power to cheer him up; the bachelor bidding him take heart and
get up to begin his pastoral life, for which he himself, he said, had
already composed an eclogue that would take the shine out of all
Sannazaro had ever written, and had bought with his own money two
famous dogs to guard the flock, one called Barcino and the other
Butron, which a herdsman of Quintanar had sold him. But for all this
Don Quixote could not shake off his sadness. His friends called in the
doctor, who felt his pulse and was not very well satisfied with it,
and said that in any case it would be well for him to attend to the
health of his soul, as that of his body was in a bad way. Don Quixote
heard this calmly; but not so his housekeeper, his niece, and his
squire, who fell weeping bitterly, as if they had him lying dead
before them. The doctor's opinion was that melancholy and depression
were bringing him to his end. Don Quixote begged them to leave him to
himself, as he had a wish to sleep a little. They obeyed, and he slept
at one stretch, as the saying is, more than six hours, so that the
housekeeper and niece thought he was going to sleep for ever. But at
the end of that time he woke up, and in a loud voice exclaimed,
"Blessed be Almighty God, who has shown me such goodness. In truth his
mercies are boundless, and the sins of men can neither limit them nor
keep them back!" The niece listened with attention to her uncle's
words, and they struck her as more coherent than what usually fell
from him, at least during his illness, so she asked, "What are you
saying, senor? Has anything strange occurred? What mercies or what
sins of men are you talking of?" "The mercies, niece," said Don
Quixote, "are those that God has this moment shown me, and with him,
as I said, my sins are no impediment to them. My reason is now free
and clear, rid of the dark shadows of ignorance that my unhappy
constant study of those detestable books of chivalry cast over it. Now
I see through their absurdities and deceptions, and it only grieves me
that this destruction of my illusions has come so late that it leaves
me no time to make some amends by reading other books that might be a
light to my soul. Niece, I feel myself at the point of death, and I
would fain meet it in such a way as to show that my life has not been
so ill that I should leave behind me the name of a madman; for though
I have been one, I would not that the fact should be made plainer at
my death. Call in to me, my dear, my good friends the curate, the
bachelor Samson Carrasco, and Master Nicholas the barber, for I wish
to confess and make my will." But his niece was saved the trouble by
the entrance of the three. The instant Don Quixote saw them he
exclaimed, "Good news for you, good sirs, that I am no longer Don
Quixote of La Mancha, but Alonso Quixano, whose way of life won for
him the name of Good. Now am I the enemy of Amadis of Gaul and of the
whole countless troop of his descendants; odious to me now are all the
profane stories of knight-errantry; now I perceive my folly, and the
peril into which reading them brought me; now, by God's mercy schooled
into my right senses, I loathe them." When the three heard him speak
in this way, they had no doubt whatever that some new craze had taken
possession of him; and said Samson, "What? Senor Don Quixote! Now that
we have intelligence of the lady Dulcinea being disenchanted, are you
taking this line; now, just as we are on the point of becoming
shepherds, to pass our lives singing, like princes, are you thinking
of turning hermit? Hush, for heaven's sake, be rational and let's have
no more nonsense." "All that nonsense," said Don Quixote, "that until
now has been a reality to my hurt, my death will, with heaven's help,
turn to my good. I feel, sirs, that I am rapidly drawing near death; a
truce to jesting; let me have a confessor to confess me, and a notary
to make my will; for in extremities like this, man must not trifle
with his soul; and while the curate is confessing me let some one, I
beg, go for the notary." They looked at one another, wondering at Don
Quixote's words; but, though uncertain, they were inclined to believe
him, and one of the signs by which they came to the conclusion he was
dying was this so sudden and complete return to his senses after
having been mad; for to the words already quoted he added much more,
so well expressed, so devout, and so rational, as to banish all doubt
and convince them that he was sound of mind. The curate turned them
all out, and left alone with him confessed him. The bachelor went for
the notary and returned shortly afterwards with him and with Sancho,
who, having already learned from the bachelor the condition his master
was in, and finding the housekeeper and niece weeping, began to
blubber and shed tears. The confession over, the curate came out
saying, "Alonso Quixano the Good is indeed dying, and is indeed in his
right mind; we may now go in to him while he makes his will." This
news gave a tremendous impulse to the brimming eyes of the
housekeeper, niece, and Sancho Panza his good squire, making the tears
burst from their eyes and a host of sighs from their hearts; for of a
truth, as has been said more than once, whether as plain Alonso
Quixano the Good, or as Don Quixote of La Mancha, Don Quixote was
always of a gentle disposition and kindly in all his ways, and hence
he was beloved, not only by those of his own house, but by all who
knew him. The notary came in with the rest, and as soon as the
preamble of the had been set out and Don Quixote had commended his
soul to God with all the devout formalities that are usual, coming to
the bequests, he said, "Item, it is my will that, touching certain
moneys in the hands of Sancho Panza (whom in my madness I made my
squire), inasmuch as between him and me there have been certain
accounts and debits and credits, no claim be made against him, nor any
account demanded of him in respect of them; but that if anything
remain over and above, after he has paid himself what I owe him, the
balance, which will be but little, shall be his, and much good may it
do him; and I'll stay here in the company of my lady the duchess; and
maybe when he comes back, he will find the lady Dulcinea's affair ever
so much advanced; for I mean in leisure hours, and at idle moments, to
give myself a spell of whipping without so much as a hair to cover
me." "For all that you must go if it be necessary, my good Sancho,"
said the duchess, "for they are worthy folk who ask you; and the faces
of these ladies must not remain overgrown in this way because of your
idle fears; that would be a hard case indeed." "In the king's name,
once more!" said Sancho; "If this charitable work were to be done for
the sake of damsels in confinement or charity-girls, a man might
expose himself to some hardships; but to bear it for the sake of
stripping beards off duennas! Devil take it! I'd sooner see them all
bearded, from the highest to the lowest, and from the most prudish to
the most affected." "You are very hard on duennas, Sancho my friend,"
said the duchess; "you incline very much to the opinion of the Toledo
apothecary. But indeed you are wrong; there are duennas in my house
that may serve as patterns of duennas; and here is my Dona Rodriguez,
who will not allow me to say otherwise." "Your excellence may say it
if you like," said the Rodriguez; "for God knows the truth of
everything; and whether we duennas are good or bad, bearded or smooth,
we are our mothers' daughters like other women; and as God sent us
into the world, he knows why he did, and on his mercy I rely, and not
on anybody's beard." "Well, Senora Rodriguez, Senora Trifaldi, and
present company," said Don Quixote, "I trust in Heaven that it will
look with kindly eyes upon your troubles, for Sancho will do as I bid
him. Only let Clavileno come and let me find myself face to face with
Malambruno, and I am certain no razor will shave you more easily than
my sword shall shave Malambruno's head off his shoulders; for 'God
bears with the wicked, but not for ever." "Ah!" exclaimed the
Distressed One at this, "may all the stars of the celestial regions
look down upon your greatness with benign eyes, valiant knight, and
shed every prosperity and valour upon your heart, that it may be the
shield and safeguard of the abused and downtrodden race of duennas,
detested by apothecaries, sneered at by squires, and made game of by
pages. Ill betide the jade that in the flower of her youth would not
sooner become a nun than a duenna! Unfortunate beings that we are, we
duennas! Though we may be descended in the direct male line from
Hector of Troy himself, our mistresses never fail to address us as
'you' if they think it makes queens of them. O giant Malambruno,
though thou art an enchanter, thou art true to thy promises. Send us
now the peerless Clavileno, that our misfortune may be brought to an
end; for if the hot weather sets in and these beards of ours are still
there, alas for our lot!" The Trifaldi said this in such a pathetic
way that she drew tears from the eyes of all and even Sancho's filled
up; and he resolved in his heart to wait and see what came of this
journey of his master's, and if it did not turn out as happily as his
master expected, he determined to leave him and go back to his wife
and children and his ordinary labour. The landlord was carrying away
the valise and the books, but the curate said to him, "Wait; I want to
see what those papers are that are written in such a good hand." The
landlord taking them out handed them to him to read, and he perceived
they were a work of about eight sheets of manuscript, with, in large
letters at the beginning, the title of "Novel of the Ill-advised
Curiosity." The curate read three or four lines to himself, and said,
"I must say the title of this novel does not seem to me a bad one, and
three days hence thou wilt depart, for I wish thee to observe in the
meantime what I do and say for her sake, that thou mayest be able to
tell it." "But what more have I to see besides what I have seen?" said
Sancho. "Much thou knowest about it!" said Don Quixote. "I have now
got to tear up my garments, to scatter about my armour, knock my head
against these rocks, and more of the same sort of thing, which thou
must witness." "For the love of God," said Sancho, "be careful, your
worship, how you give yourself those knocks on the head, for you may
come across such a rock, and in such a way, that the very first may
put an end to the whole contrivance of this penance; and I should
think, if indeed knocks on the head seem necessary to you, and this
business cannot be done without them, you might be content--as the
whole thing is feigned, and counterfeit, and in joke--you might be
content, I say, with giving them to yourself in the water, or against
something soft, like cotton; and leave it all to me; for I'll tell my
lady that your worship knocked your head against a point of rock
harder than a diamond." "I thank thee for thy good intentions, friend
Sancho," answered Don Quixote, "but I would have thee know that all
these things I am doing are not in joke, but very much in earnest, for
anything else would be a transgression of the ordinances of chivalry,
which forbid us to tell any lie whatever under the penalties due to
apostasy; and to do one thing instead of another is just the same as
lying; so my knocks on the head must be real, solid, and valid,
without anything sophisticated or fanciful about them, and it will be
needful to leave me some lint to dress my wounds, since fortune has
compelled us to do without the balsam we lost." "It was worse losing
the ass," replied Sancho, "for with him lint and all were lost; but I
beg of your worship not to remind me again of that accursed liquor,
for my soul, not to say my stomach, turns at hearing the very name of
it; and I beg of you, too, to reckon as past the three days you
allowed me for seeing the mad things you do, for I take them as seen
already and pronounced upon, and I will tell wonderful stories to my
lady; so write the letter and send me off at once, for I long to
return and take your worship out of this purgatory where I am leaving
you." "Purgatory dost thou call it, Sancho?" said Don Quixote, "rather
call it hell, or even worse if there be anything worse." "For one who
is in hell," said Sancho, "nulla est retentio, as I have heard say."
"I do not understand what retentio means," said Don Quixote.
"Retentio," answered Sancho, "means that whoever is in hell never
comes nor can come out of it, which will be the opposite case with
your worship or my legs will be idle, that is if I have spurs to
enliven Rocinante: let me once get to El Toboso and into the presence
of my lady Dulcinea, and I will tell her such things of the follies
and madnesses (for it is all one) that your worship has done and is
still doing, that I will manage to make her softer than a glove though
I find her harder than a cork tree; and with her sweet and honeyed
answer I will come back through the air like a witch, and take your
worship out of this purgatory where I am leaving you." "Purgatory dost
thou call it, Sancho?" said Don Quixote, "rather call it hell, or even
worse if there be anything worse." "For one who is in hell," said
Sancho, "nulla est retentio, as I have heard say." "I do not
understand what retentio means," said Don Quixote. "Retentio,"
answered Sancho, "means that whoever is in hell never comes nor can
come out of it, which will be the opposite case with your worship or
my legs will be idle, that is if I have spurs to enliven Rocinante:
let me once get to El Toboso and into the presence of my lady
Dulcinea, and I will tell her such things of the follies and madnesses
(for it is all one) that your worship has done and is still doing,
that I will manage to make her softer than a glove though I find her
harder than a cork tree; and with her sweet and honeyed answer I will
come back through the air like a witch, and take your worship out of
this purgatory where I am leaving you." "Purgatory dost thou call it,
Sancho?" said Don Quixote, "rather call it hell, or even worse if
there be anything worse." "For one who is in hell," said Sancho,
"nulla est retentio, as I have heard say." "I do not understand what
retentio means," said Don Quixote. "Retentio," answered Sancho, "means
that whoever is in hell never comes nor can come out of it, which will
be the opposite case with your worship or my legs will be idle, that
is if I have spurs to enliven Rocinante: let me once get to El Toboso
and into the presence of my lady Dulcinea, and I will tell her such
things of the follies and madnesses (for it is all one) that your
worship has done and is still doing, that I will manage to make her
softer than a glove though I find her harder than a cork tree; and
with her sweet and honeyed answer I will come back through the air
like a witch, and take your worship out of this purgatory that seems
to be hell but is not, as there is hope of getting out of it; which,
as I have said, those in hell have not, and I believe your worship
will not say anything to the contrary." "That is true," said he of the
Rueful Countenance, "but how shall we manage to write the letter?"
"And the ass-colt order too," added Sancho. "All shall be included,"
said Don Quixote; "and as there is no paper, it would be well done to
write it on the leaves of trees, as the ancients did, or on tablets of
wax; though that would be as hard to find just now as paper. But it
has just occurred to me how it may be conveniently and even more than
conveniently written, and that is in the note-book that belonged to
Cardenio, and thou wilt take care to have it copied on paper, in a
good hand, at the first village thou comest to where there is a
schoolmaster, or if not, any sacristan will copy it; but see thou give
it not to any notary to copy, for they write a law hand that Satan
could not make out." "But what is to be done about the signature?"
said Sancho. "The letters of Amadis were never signed," said Don
Quixote. "That is all very well," said Sancho, "but the order must
needs be signed, and if it is copied they will say the signature is
false, and I shall be left without ass-colts." "The order shall go
signed in the same book," said Don Quixote, "and on seeing it my niece
will make no difficulty about obeying it; as to the loveletter thou
canst put by way of signature, 'Yours till death, the Knight of the
Rueful Countenance;' and between these two I put into it more than
three hundred 'my souls' and 'my life's' and 'my eyes." CHAPTER XXXI.
OF THE DELECTABLE DISCUSSION BETWEEN DON QUIXOTE AND SANCHO PANZA, HIS
SQUIRE, TOGETHER WITH OTHER INCIDENTS "All that is not unsatisfactory
to me," said Don Quixote. "Go on; thou didst reach her; and what was
that queen of beauty doing? Surely thou didst find her stringing
pearls, or embroidering some device in gold thread for this her
enslaved knight." "I did not," said Sancho, "but I found her winnowing
two bushels of wheat in the yard of her house." "Then depend upon it,"
said Don Quixote, "the grains of that wheat were pearls when touched
by her hands; and didst thou look, friend? was it white wheat or
brown?" "It was neither, but red," said Sancho. "Then I promise thee,"
said Don Quixote, "that, winnowed by her hands, beyond a doubt the
bread it made was of the whitest; but go on; when thou gavest her my
letter, did she kiss it? Did she place it on her head? Did she perform
any ceremony befitting it, or what did she do?" "When I went to give
it to her," replied Sancho, "she was hard at it swaying from side to
side with a lot of wheat she had in the sieve, and she said to me,
'Lay the letter, friend, on the top of that sack, for I cannot read it
until I have done sifting all this." "Discreet lady!" said Don
Quixote; "that was in order to read it at her leisure and enjoy it;
proceed, Sancho; while she was engaged in her occupation what converse
did she hold with thee? What did she ask about me, and what answer
didst thou give? Make haste; tell me all, and let not an atom be left
behind in the ink-bottle." "She asked me nothing," said Sancho; "but I
told her how your worship was left doing penance in her service, naked
from the waist up, in among these mountains like a savage, sleeping on
the ground, not eating bread off a tablecloth nor combing your beard,
weeping and cursing your fortune." "In saying I cursed my fortune thou
saidst wrong," said Don Quixote; "for rather do I bless it and shall
bless it all the days of my life for having made me worthy of aspiring
to love so lofty a lady as Dulcinea del Toboso." "And so lofty she
is," said Sancho, "that she overtops me by more than a
hand's-breadth." "What! Sancho," said Don Quixote, "didst thou measure
with her?" "I measured in this way," said Sancho; "going to help her
to put a sack of wheat on the back of an ass, we came so close
together that I could see she stood more than a good palm over me."
"Well!" said Don Quixote, "and doth she not of a truth accompany and
adorn this greatness with a thousand million charms of mind! But one
thing thou wilt not deny, Sancho; when thou camest close to her didst
thou not perceive a Sabaean odour, an aromatic fragrance, a, I know
not what, delicious, that I cannot find a name for; I mean a
redolence, an exhalation, as if thou wert in the shop of some dainty
glover?" "All I can say is," said Sancho, "that I did perceive a
little odour, something goaty; it must have been that she was all in a
sweat with hard work." "It could not be that," said Don Quixote, "but
thou must have been suffering from cold in the head, or must have
smelt thyself; for I know well what would be the scent of that rose
among thorns, that lily of the field, that dissolved amber." "Maybe
so," replied Sancho; "there often comes from myself that same odour
which then seemed to me to come from her grace the lady Dulcinea; but
that's no wonder, for one devil is like another." "Well then,"
continued Don Quixote, "now she has done sifting the corn and sent it
to the mill; what did she do when she read the letter?" "As for the
letter," said Sancho, "she did not read it, for she said she could
neither read nor write; instead of that she tore it up into small
pieces, saying that she did not want to let anyone read it lest her
secrets should become known in the village, and that what I had told
her by word of mouth about the love your worship bore her, and the
extraordinary penance you were doing for her sake, was enough; and, to
make an end of it, she told me to tell your worship that she kissed
your hands, and that she had a greater desire to see you than to write
to you; and that therefore she entreated and commanded you, on sight
of this present, to come out of these thickets, and to have done with
carrying on absurdities, and to set out at once for El Toboso, unless
something else of greater importance should happen, for she had a
great desire to see your worship. She laughed greatly when I told her
how your worship was left doing penance in her service, naked from the
waist up, in among these mountains like a savage, sleeping on the
ground, not eating bread off a tablecloth nor combing your beard,
weeping and cursing your fortune." "In saying I cursed my fortune thou
saidst wrong," said Don Quixote; "for rather do I bless it and shall
bless it all the days of my life for having made me worthy of aspiring
to love so lofty a lady as Dulcinea del Toboso." "And so lofty she
is," said Sancho, "that she overtops me by more than a
hand's-breadth." "What! Sancho," said Don Quixote, "didst thou measure
with her?" "I measured in this way," said Sancho; "going to help her
to put a sack of wheat on the back of an ass, we came so close
together that I could see she stood more than a good palm over me."
"Well!" said Don Quixote, "and doth she not of a truth accompany and
adorn this greatness with a thousand million charms of mind! But one
thing thou wilt not deny, Sancho; when thou camest close to her didst
thou not perceive a Sabaean odour, an aromatic fragrance, a, I know
not what, delicious, that I cannot find a name for; I mean a
redolence, an exhalation, as if thou wert in the shop of some dainty
glover?" "All I can say is," said Sancho, "that I did perceive a
little odour, something goaty; it must have been that she was all in a
sweat with hard work." "It could not be that," said Don Quixote, "but
thou must have been suffering from cold in the head, or must have
smelt thyself; for I know well what would be the scent of that rose
among thorns, that lily of the field, that dissolved amber." "Maybe
so," replied Sancho; "there often comes from myself that same odour
which then seemed to me to come from her grace the lady Dulcinea; but
that's no wonder, for one devil is like another." "Well then,"
continued Don Quixote, "now she has done sifting the corn and sent it
to the mill; what did she do when she read the letter?" "As for the
letter," said Sancho, "she did not read it, for she said she could
neither read nor write; instead of that she tore it up into small
pieces, saying that she did not want to let anyone read it lest her
secrets should become known in the village, and that what I had told
her by word of mouth about the love your worship bore her, and the
extraordinary penance you were doing for her sake, was enough; and, to
make an end of it, she told me to tell your worship that she kissed
your hands, and that she had a greater desire to see you than to write
to you; and that therefore she entreated and commanded you, on sight
of this present, to come out of these thickets, and to have done with
carrying on absurdities, and to set out at once for El Toboso, unless
something else of greater importance should happen, for she had a
great desire to see your worship. She laughed greatly when I told her
how your worship was called The Knight of the Rueful Countenance; I
asked her if that Biscayan the other day had been there; and she told
me he had, and that he was an honest fellow; I asked her too about the
galley slaves, but she said she had not seen any as yet." "So far all
goes well," said Don Quixote; "but tell me what jewel was it that she
gave thee on taking thy leave, in return for thy tidings of me? For it
is a usual and ancient custom with knights and ladies errant to give
the squires, damsels, or dwarfs who bring tidings of their ladies to
the knights, or of their knights to the ladies, some rich jewel as a
guerdon for good news,' and acknowledgment of the message." "That is
very likely," said Sancho, "and a good custom it was, to my mind; but
that must have been in days gone by, for now it would seem to be the
custom only to give a piece of bread and cheese; because that was what
my lady Dulcinea gave me over the top of the yard-wall when I took
leave of her; and more by token it was sheep's-milk cheese." "She is
generous in the extreme," said Don Quixote, "and if she did not give
thee a jewel of gold, no doubt it must have been because she had not
one to hand there to give thee; but sleeves are good after Easter; I
shall see her and all shall be made right. But knowest thou what
amazes me, Sancho? It seems to me thou must have gone and come through
the air, for thou hast taken but little more than three days to go to
El Toboso and return, though it is more than thirty leagues from here
to there. From which I am inclined to think that the sage magician who
is my friend, and watches over my interests (for of necessity there is
and must be one, or else I should not be a right knight-errant), that
this same, I say, must have helped thee to travel without thy
knowledge; for some of these sages will catch up a knight-errant
sleeping in his bed, and without his knowing how or in what way it
happened, he wakes up the next day more than a thousand leagues away
from the place where he went to sleep. And if it were not for this,
knights-errant would not be able to give aid to one another in peril,
as they do at every turn. For a knight, maybe, is fighting in the
mountains of Armenia with some dragon, or fierce serpent, or another
knight, and gets the worst of the battle, and is at the point of
death; but when he least looks for it, there appears over against him
on a cloud, or chariot of fire, another knight, a friend of his, who
just before had been in England, and who takes his part, and delivers
him from death; and at night he finds himself in his own quarters
supping very much to his satisfaction; and yet from one place to the
other will have been two or three thousand leagues. And all this is
done by the craft and skill of the sage enchanters who take care of
those valiant knights; so that, friend Sancho, I find no difficulty in
believing that thou mayest have gone from this place to El Toboso and
returned in such a short time, since, as I have said, some friendly
sage must have carried thee through the air without thee perceiving
it." "That must have been it," said Sancho, "for indeed Rocinante went
like a gipsy's ass with quicksilver in his ears." "Quicksilver!" said
Don Quixote, "aye and what is more, a legion of devils, folk that can
travel and make others travel without being weary, exactly as the whim
seizes them. But putting this aside, what thinkest thou I ought to do
about my lady's command to go and see her? For though I feel that I am
bound to obey her mandate, I feel too that I am debarred by the boon I
have accorded to the princess that accompanies us, and the law of
chivalry compels me to have regard for my word in preference to my
inclination; on the one hand the desire to see my lady pursues and
harasses me, on the other my solemn promise and the glory I shall win
in this enterprise urge and call me; but what I think I shall do is to
travel with all speed and reach quickly the place where this giant is,
and on my arrival I shall cut off his head, and establish the princess
peacefully in her realm, and forthwith I shall return to behold the
light that lightens my senses, to whom I shall make such excuses that
she will be led to approve of my delay, for she will see that it
entirely tends to increase her glory and fame; for all that I have
won, am winning, or shall win by arms in this life, comes to me of the
favour she extends to me, and because I am hers." "Ah! what a sad
state your worship's brains are in!" said Sancho. "Tell me, senor, do
you mean to travel all that way for nothing, and to let slip and lose
so rich and great a match as this where they give as a portion a
kingdom that in sober truth I have heard say is more than twenty
thousand leagues round about, and abounds with all things necessary to
support human life, and is bigger than Portugal and Castile put
together? Peace, for the love of God! Blush for what you have said,
and take my advice, and forgive me, and marry at once in the first
village where there is a curate; if not, here is our licentiate who
will do the business beautifully; remember, I am old enough to give
advice, and this I am giving comes pat to the purpose; for a sparrow
in the hand is better than a vulture on the wing.'" "At the same time,
Sancho," replied Don Quixote, "if thou hadst let me attack them as I
wanted, at the very least the emperor's gold crown and Cupid's painted
wings would have fallen to thee as spoils, for I should have taken
them by force and given them into thy hands." "The sceptres and crowns
of those play-actor emperors," said Sancho, "were never yet pure gold,
but only brass foil or tin." "That is true," said Don Quixote, "for it
would not be right that the accessories of the drama should be real,
instead of being mere fictions and semblances, like the drama itself;
towards which, Sancho-and, as a necessary consequence, towards those
who represent and produce it--I would that thou wert favourably
disposed, for they are all instruments of great good to the State,
placing before us at every step a mirror in which we may see vividly
displayed what goes on in human life; nor is there any similitude that
shows us more faithfully what we are and ought to be than the play and
the players. Come, tell me, hast thou not seen a play acted in which
kings, emperors, pontiffs, knights, ladies, and divers other
personages were introduced? One plays the villain, another the knave,
this one the merchant, that the soldier, one the sharp-witted fool,
another the foolish lover; and when the play is over, and they have
put off the dresses they wore in it, all the actors become equal."
"Yes, I have seen that," said Sancho. "Well then," said Don Quixote,
"the same thing happens in the comedy and life of this world, where
some play emperors, others popes, and, in short, all the characters
that can be brought into a play; but when it is over, that is to say
when life ends, death strips them all of the garments that distinguish
one from the other, and all are equal in the grave." "A fine
comparison!" said Sancho; "though not so new but that I have heard it
many and many a time, as well as that other one of the game of chess;
how, so long as the game lasts, each piece has its own particular
office, and when the game is finished they are all mixed, jumbled up
and shaken together, and stowed away in the bag, which is much like
ending life in the grave." "Thou art growing less doltish and more
shrewd every day, Sancho," said Don Quixote. "Ay," said Sancho; "it
must be that some of your worship's shrewdness sticks to me; land
that, of itself, is barren and dry, will come to yield good fruit if
you dung it and till it; what I mean is that your worship's
conversation has been the dung that has fallen on the barren soil of
my dry wit, and the time I have been in your service and society has
been the tillage; and with the help of this I hope to yield fruit in
abundance that will not fall away or slide from those paths of good
breeding that your worship has made in my parched understanding." Don
Quixote laughed at Sancho's affected phraseology, and perceived that
what he said about his improvement was true, for now and then he spoke
in a way that surprised him; though always, or mostly, when Sancho
tried to talk fine and attempted polite language, he wound up by
toppling over from the summit of his simplicity into the abyss of his
ignorance; and where he showed his culture and his memory to the
greatest advantage was in dragging in proverbs, no matter whether they
had any bearing or not upon the subject in hand, as may have been seen
already and will be noticed in the course of this history. In
conversation of this kind they passed a good part of the night, but
Sancho felt a desire to let down the curtains of his eyes, as he used
to say when he wanted to go to sleep; and stripping Dapple he left him
at liberty to graze his fill. He did not remove Rocinante's saddle, as
his master's express orders were, that so long as they were in the
field or not sleeping under a roof Rocinante was not to be
stripped--the ancient usage established and observed by knights-errant
being to take off the bridle and hang it on the saddle-bow, but to
remove the saddle from the horse--never! Sancho acted accordingly, and
gave him the same liberty he had given Dapple, between whom and
Rocinante there was a friendship so unequalled and so strong, that it
is handed down by tradition from father to son, that the author of
this veracious history devoted some special chapters to it, which, in
order to preserve the propriety and decorum due to a history so
heroic, he did not insert therein; although at times he forgets this
resolution of his and describes how eagerly the two beasts would
scratch one another when they were together and how, when they were
tired or full, Rocinante would lay his neck across Dapple's,
stretching half a yard or more on the other side, and the pair would
stand thus, gazing thoughtfully on the ground, for three days, or at
least so long as they were left alone, or hunger did not drive them to
go and look for food. I may add that they say the author left it on
record that he likened their friendship to that of Nisus and Euryalus,
and Pylades and Orestes; and if that be so, it may be perceived, to
the admiration of mankind, how firm the friendship must have been
between these two peaceful animals, shaming men, who preserve
friendships with one another so badly. This was why it was said-- For
friend no longer is there friend; The reeds turn lances now. And some
one else has sung-- Friend to friend the bug, etc. And let no one
fancy that the author was at all astray when he compared the
friendship of these animals to that of men; for men have received many
lessons from beasts, and learned many important things, as, for
example, the clyster from the stork, vomit and gratitude from the dog,
watchfulness from the crane, foresight from the ant, modesty from the
elephant, and loyalty from the horse. Sancho at last fell asleep at
the foot of a cork tree, while Don Quixote dozed at that of a sturdy
oak; but a short time only had elapsed when a noise he heard behind
him awoke him, and rising up startled, he listened and looked in the
direction the noise came from, and perceived two men on horseback, one
of whom, letting himself drop from the saddle, said to the other,
"Dismount, my friend, and take the bridles off the horses, for, so far
as I can see, this place will furnish grass for them, and the solitude
and silence my love-sick thoughts need of." As he said this he
stretched himself upon the ground, and as he flung himself down, the
armour in which he was clad rattled, whereby Don Quixote perceived
that he must be a knight-errant; and going over to Sancho, who was
asleep, he shook him by the arm and with no small difficulty brought
him back to his senses, and said in a low voice to him, "Brother
Sancho, we have got an adventure." "God send us a good one," said
Sancho; "and where may her ladyship the adventure be?" "Where,
Sancho?" replied Don Quixote; "turn thine eyes and look, and thou wilt
see stretched there a knight-errant, who, it strikes me, is not over
and above happy, for I saw him fling himself off his horse and throw
himself on the ground with a certain air of dejection, and his armour
rattled as he fell." "Well," said Sancho, "how does your worship make
out that to be an adventure?" "I do not mean to say," returned Don
Quixote, "that it is a complete adventure, but that it is the
beginning of one, for it is in this way adventures begin. But listen,
for it seems he is tuning a lute or guitar, and from the way he is
spitting and clearing his chest he must be getting ready to sing
something." "Faith, you are right," said Sancho, "and no doubt he is
some enamoured knight." "There is no knight-errant that is not," said
Don Quixote; "but let us listen to him, for, if he sings, by that
thread we shall extract the ball of his thoughts; because out of the
abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh." Sancho was about to reply
to his master, but the Knight of the Grove's voice, which was neither
very bad nor very good, stopped him, and listening attentively the
pair heard him sing this SONNET Your pleasure, prithee, lady mine,
unfold; Declare the terms that I am to obey; My will to yours
submissively I mould, And from your law my feet shall never stray.
Would you I die, to silent grief a prey? Then count me even now as
dead and cold; Would you I tell my woes in some new way? Then shall my
tale by Love itself be told. The unison of opposites to prove, Of the
soft wax and diamond hard am I; But still, obedient to the laws of
love, Here, hard or soft, I offer you my breast, Whate'er you grave or
stamp thereon shall rest Indelible for all eternity. With an "Ah me!"
that seemed to be drawn from the inmost recesses of his heart, the
Knight of the Grove brought his lay to an end, and shortly afterwards
exclaimed in a melancholy and piteous voice, "O fairest and most
ungrateful woman on earth! What! can it be, most serene Casildea de
Vandalia, that thou wilt suffer this thy captive knight to waste away
and perish in ceaseless wanderings and rude and arduous toils? It is
not enough that I have compelled all the knights of Navarre, all the
Leonese, all the Tartesians, all the Castilians, and finally all the
knights of La Mancha, to confess thee the most beautiful in the
world?" "Not so," said Don Quixote at this, "for I am of La Mancha,
and I have never confessed anything of the sort, nor could I nor
should I confess a thing so much to the prejudice of my lady's beauty;
thou seest how this knight is raving, Sancho. But let us listen,
perhaps he will tell us more about himself." "That he will," returned
Sancho, "for he seems in a mood to bewail himself for a month at a
stretch." But this was not the case, for the Knight of the Grove,
hearing voices near him, instead of continuing his lamentation, stood
up and exclaimed in a distinct but courteous tone, "Who goes there?
What are you? Do you belong to the number of the happy or of the
miserable?" "Of the miserable," answered Don Quixote. "Then come to
me," said he of the Grove, "and rest assured that it is to woe itself
and affliction itself you come." Don Quixote, finding himself answered
in such a soft and courteous manner, went over to him, and so did
Sancho. The doleful knight took Don Quixote by the arm, saying, "Sit
down here, sir knight; for, that you are one, and of those that
profess knight-errantry, it is to me a sufficient proof to have found
you in this place, where solitude and night, the natural couch and
proper retreat of knights-errant, keep you company." To which Don made
answer, "A knight I am of the profession you mention, and though
sorrows, misfortunes, and calamities have made my heart their abode,
the compassion I feel for the misfortunes of others has not been
thereby banished from it. From what you have just now sung I gather
that yours spring from love, I mean from the love you bear that fair
ingrate you named in your lament." In the meantime, they had seated
themselves together on the hard ground peaceably and sociably, just as
if, as soon as day broke, they were not going to break one another's
heads. "Are you, sir knight, in love perchance?" asked he of the Grove
of Don Quixote. "By mischance I am," replied Don Quixote; "though the
ills arising from well-bestowed affections should be esteemed favours
rather than misfortunes." "That is true," returned he of the Grove,
"if scorn did not unsettle our reason and understanding, for if it be
excessive it looks like revenge." "I was never scorned by my lady,"
said Don Quixote. "Certainly not," said Sancho, who stood close by,
"for my lady is as a lamb, and softer than a roll of butter." "Is this
your squire?" asked he of the Grove. "He is," said Don Quixote. "I
never yet saw a squire," said he of the Grove, "who ventured to speak
when his master was speaking; at least, there is mine, who is as big
as his father, and it cannot be proved that he has ever opened his
lips when I am speaking." "By my faith then," said Sancho, "I have
spoken, and am fit to speak, in the presence of one as much, or
even--but never mind--it only makes it worse to stir it." The barber
did not care to answer Sancho lest by his plain speaking he should
disclose what the curate and he himself were trying so hard to
conceal; and under the same apprehension the curate had asked the
canon to ride on a little in advance, so that he might tell him the
mystery of this man in the cage, and other things that would amuse
him. The canon agreed, and going on ahead with his servants, listened
with attention to the account of the character, life, madness, and
ways of Don Quixote, given him by the curate, who described to him
briefly the beginning and origin of his craze, and told him the whole
story of his adventures up to his being confined in the cage, together
with the plan they had of taking him home to try if by any means they
could discover a cure for his madness. The canon and his servants were
surprised anew when they heard Don Quixote's strange story, and when
it was finished he said, "To tell the truth, senor curate, I for my
part consider what they call books of chivalry to be mischievous to
the State; and though, led by idle and false taste, I have read the
beginnings of almost all that have been printed, I never could manage
to read any one of them from beginning to end; for it seems to me they
are all more or less the same thing; and one has nothing more in it
than another; this no more than that. And in my opinion this sort of
writing and composition is of the same species as the fables they call
the Milesian, nonsensical tales that aim solely at giving amusement
and not instruction, exactly the opposite of the apologue fables which
amuse and instruct at the same time. And though it may be the chief
object of such books to amuse, I do not know how they can succeed,
when they are so full of such monstrous nonsense. For the enjoyment
the mind feels must come from the beauty and harmony which it
perceives or contemplates in the things that the eye or the
imagination brings before it; and nothing that has any ugliness or
disproportion about it can give any pleasure. What beauty, then, or
what proportion of the parts to the whole, or of the whole to the
parts, can there be in a book or fable where a lad of sixteen cuts
down a giant as tall as a tower and makes two halves of him as if he
was an almond cake? And when they want to give us a picture of a
battle, after having told us that there are a million of combatants on
the side of the enemy, let the hero of the book be opposed to them,
and we have perforce to believe, whether we like it or not, that the
said knight wins the victory by the single might of his strong arm.
And then, what shall we say of Gasabal, the squire of Galaor, who was
so silent that in order to indicate to us the greatness of his
marvellous taciturnity his name is only once mentioned in the whole of
that history, as long as it is truthful? From all I have said thou
wilt gather, Sancho, that there must be a difference between master
and man, between lord and lackey, between knight and squire: so that
from this day forward in our intercourse we must observe more respect
and take less liberties, for in whatever way I may be provoked with
you it will be bad for the pitcher. The favours and benefits that I
have promised you will come in due time, and if they do not your wages
at least will not be lost, as I have already told you." "All that your
worship says is very well," said Sancho, "but I should like to know
(in case the time of favours should not come, and it might be
necessary to fall back upon wages) how much did the squire of a
knight-errant get in those days, and did they agree by the month, or
by the day like bricklayers?" "I do not believe," replied Don Quixote,
"that such squires were ever on wages, but were dependent on favour;
and if I have now mentioned thine in the sealed will I have left at
home, it was with a view to what may happen; for as yet I know not how
chivalry will turn out in these wretched times of ours, and I do not
wish my soul to suffer for trifles in the other world; for I would
have thee know, Sancho, that in this there is no condition more
hazardous than that of adventurers." "That is true," said Sancho,
"since the mere noise of the hammers of a fulling mill can disturb and
disquiet the heart of such a valiant errant adventurer as your
worship; but you may be sure I will not open my lips henceforward to
make light of anything of your worship's, but only to honour you as my
master and natural lord." "By so doing," replied Don Quixote, "shalt
thou live long on the face of the earth; for next to parents, masters
are to be respected as though they were parents." CHAPTER XXI. WHICH
TREATS OF THE EXALTED ADVENTURE AND RICH PRIZE OF MAMBRINO'S HELMET,
TOGETHER WITH OTHER THINGS THAT HAPPENED TO OUR INVINCIBLE KNIGHT It
now began to rain a little, and Sancho was for going into the fulling
mills, but Don Quixote had taken such an abhorrence to them on account
of the late joke that he would not enter them on any account; so
turning aside to right they came upon another road, different from
that which they had taken the night before. Shortly afterwards Don
Quixote perceived a man on horseback who wore on his head something
that shone like gold, and the moment he saw him he turned to Sancho
and said: "I think, Sancho, there is no proverb that is not true, all
being maxims drawn from experience itself, the mother of all the
sciences, especially that one that says, 'Where one door shuts,
another opens.' I say so because if last night fortune shut the door
of the adventure we were looking for against us, cheating us with the
fulling mills, it now opens wide another one for another better and
more certain adventure, and if I do not contrive to enter it, it will
be my own fault, and I cannot lay it to my ignorance of fulling mills,
or the darkness of the night. I say this because, if I mistake not,
there comes towards us one who wears on his head the helmet of
Mambrino, concerning which I took the oath thou rememberest." "Mind
what you say, your worship, and still more what you do," said Sancho,
"for I don't want any more fulling mills to finish off fulling and
knocking our senses out." "The devil take thee, man," said Don
Quixote; "what has a helmet to do with fulling mills?" "I don't know,"
replied Sancho, "but, faith, if I might speak as I used, perhaps I
could give such reasons that your worship would see you were mistaken
in what you say." "How can I be mistaken in what I say, unbelieving
traitor?" returned Don Quixote; "tell me, seest thou not yonder knight
coming towards us on a dappled grey steed, who has upon his head a
helmet of gold?" "What I see and make out," answered Sancho, "is only
a man on a grey ass like my own, who has something that shines on his
head." "Well, that is the helmet of Mambrino," said Don Quixote;
"stand to one side and leave me alone with him; thou shalt see how,
without saying a word, to save time, I shall bring this adventure to
an issue and possess myself of the helmet I have so longed for." "I
will take care to stand aside," said Sancho; "but God grant, I say
once more, that it may be marjoram and not fulling mills." "I have
told thee, brother, on no account to mention those fulling mills to me
again," said Don Quixote, "or I vow--and I say no more-I'll full the
soul out of you." Sancho held his peace in dread lest his master
should carry out the vow he had hurled like a bowl at him. The fact of
the matter as regards the helmet, steed, and knight that Don Quixote
saw, was this. In that neighbourhood there were two villages, one of
them so small that it had neither apothecary's shop nor barber, which
the other that was close to it had, so the barber of the larger served
the smaller, and in it there was a sick man who required to be bled
and another man who wanted to be shaved, and on this errand the barber
was going, carrying with him a brass basin; but as luck would have it,
as he was on the way it began to rain, and not to spoil his hat, which
probably was a new one, he put the basin on his head, and being clean
it glittered at half a league's distance. He rode upon a grey ass, as
Sancho said, and this was what made it seem to Don Quixote to be a
dapple-grey steed and a knight and a golden helmet; for everything he
saw he made to fall in with his crazy chivalry and ill-errant notions;
and when he saw the poor knight draw near, without entering into any
parley with him, at Rocinante's top speed he bore down upon him with
the pike pointed low, fully determined to run him through and through,
and as he reached him, without checking the fury of his charge, he
cried to him: "Defend thyself, miserable being, or yield me of thine
own accord that which is so reasonably my due." The barber, who
without any expectation or apprehension of it saw this apparition
coming down upon him, had no other way of saving himself from the
stroke of the lance but to let himself fall off his ass; and no sooner
had he touched the ground than he sprang up more nimbly than a deer
and sped away across the plain faster than the wind. He left the basin
on the ground, with which Don Quixote contented himself, saying that
the pagan had shown his discretion and imitated the beaver, which
finding itself pressed by the hunters bites and cuts off with its
teeth that for which, by its natural instinct, it knows it is pursued.
He told Sancho to pick up the helmet, and he taking it in his hands
said: "By God the basin is a good one, and worth a real of eight if it
is worth a maravedis," and handed it to his master, who immediately
put it on his head, turning it round, now this way, now that, in
search of fitment, and not finding it he said, "Clearly the pagan to
whose measure this famous head-piece was first forged must have had a
very large head; but the worst of it is half of it is wanting." When
Sancho heard him call the basin a headpiece he was unable to restrain
his laughter, but remembering his master's wrath he checked himself in
the midst of it. "What art thou laughing at, Sancho?" said Don
Quixote. "I am laughing," said he, "to think of the great head the
pagan must have had who owned this helmet, for it looks exactly like a
regular barber's basin." "Dost thou know what I suspect, Sancho?" said
Don Quixote; "that this wonderful piece of this enchanted helmet must
by some strange accident have come into the hands of some one who was
unable to recognise or realise its value, and who, not knowing what he
did, and seeing it to be of the purest gold, must have melted down one
half for the sake of what it might be worth, and of the other made
this which is like a barber's basin as thou sayest; but be it as it
may, to me who recognise it, its transformation makes no difference,
for I will set it to rights at the first village where there is a
blacksmith, and in such style that that helmet the god of smithies
forged for the god of battles shall not surpass it or even come up to
it; and in the meantime I will wear it as well as I can, for something
is better than nothing; all the more as it will be quite enough to
protect me from any chance blow of a stone." "That is," said Sancho,
"if it is not shot with a sling as they were in the battle of the two
armies, when they signed the cross on your worship's grinders and
smashed the flask with that blessed draught that made me vomit my
bowels up." "It does not grieve me much to have lost it," said Don
Quixote, "for thou knowest, Sancho, that I have the receipt in my
memory." "So have I," answered Sancho, "but if ever I make it, or try
it again as long as I live, may this be my last hour; moreover, I have
no intention of putting myself in the way of wanting it, for I mean,
with all my five senses, to keep myself from being wounded or from
wounding anyone: as to being blanketed again I say nothing, for it is
hard to prevent mishaps of that sort, and if they come there is
nothing for it but to squeeze our shoulders together, hold our breath,
shut our eyes, and let ourselves go where luck and the blanket may
send us." "Thou art a bad Christian, Sancho," said Don Quixote on
hearing this, "for once an injury has been done thee thou never
forgettest it: but know that it is the part of noble and generous
hearts not to attach importance to trifles. What lame leg hast thou
got by it, what broken rib, what cracked head, that thou canst not
forget that jest? For jest and sport it was, properly regarded, and
had I not seen it in that light I would have returned and done more
mischief in revenging thee than the Greeks did for the rape of Helen,
who, if she were alive now, or if my Dulcinea had lived then, might
depend upon it she would not be so famous for her beauty as she is;"
and here he heaved a sigh and sent it aloft; and said Sancho, "Let it
pass for a jest as it cannot be revenged in earnest, but I know what
sort of jest and earnest it was, and I know it will never be rubbed
out of my memory any more than off my shoulders. But putting that
aside, will your worship tell me what are we to do with this
dapple-grey steed that looks like a grey ass, which that Martino that
your worship overthrew has left deserted here? for, from the way he
took to his heels and bolted, he is not likely ever to come back for
it; and by my beard but the grey is a good one." "I have never been in
the habit," said Don Quixote, "of taking spoil of those whom I
vanquish, nor is it the practice of chivalry to take away their horses
and leave them to go on foot, unless indeed it be that the victor have
lost his own in the combat, in which case it is lawful to take that of
the vanquished as a thing won in lawful war; therefore, Sancho, leave
this horse, or ass, or whatever thou wilt have it to be; for when its
owner sees us gone hence he will come back for it." "God knows I
should like to take it," returned Sancho, "or at least to change it
for my own, which does not seem to me as good a one: verily the laws
of chivalry are strict, since they cannot be stretched to let one ass
be changed for another; I should like to know if I might at least
change trappings." "On that head I am not quite certain," answered Don
Quixote, "and the matter being doubtful, pending better information, I
say thou mayest change them, if so be thou hast urgent need of them."
"So urgent is it," answered Sancho, "that if they were for my own
person I could not want them more;" and forthwith, fortified by this
licence, he effected the mutatio capparum, rigging out his beast to
the ninety-nines and making quite another thing of it. This done, they
broke their fast on the remains of the spoils of war plundered from
the sumpter mule, and drank of the brook that flowed from the fulling
mills, without casting a look in that direction, in such loathing did
they hold them for the alarm they had caused them; and, all anger and
gloom removed, they mounted and, without taking any fixed road (not to
fix upon any being the proper thing for true knights-errant), they set
out, guided by Rocinante's will, which carried along with it that of
his master, not to say that of the ass, which always followed him
wherever he led, lovingly and sociably; nevertheless they returned to
the high road, and pursued it at a venture without any other aim. As
they went along, then, in this way Sancho said to his master, "Senor,
would your worship give me leave to speak a little to you? For since
you laid that hard injunction of silence on me several things have
gone to rot in my stomach, and I have now just one on the tip of my
tongue that I don't want to be spoiled." "Say, on, Sancho," said Don
Quixote, "and be brief in thy discourse, for there is no pleasure in
one that is long." "Well then, senor," returned Sancho, "I say that
for some days past I have been considering how little is got or gained
by going in search of these adventures that your worship seeks in
these wilds and cross-roads, where, even if the most perilous are
victoriously achieved, there is no one to see or know of them, and so
they must be left untold for ever, to the loss of your worship's
object and the credit they deserve; therefore it seems to me it would
be better (saving your worship's better judgment) if we were to go and
serve some emperor or other great prince who may have some war on
hand, in whose service your worship may prove the worth of your
person, your great might, and greater understanding, on perceiving
which the lord in whose service we may be will perforce have to reward
us, each according to his merits; and there you will not be at a loss
for some one to set down your achievements in writing so as to
preserve their memory for ever. Of my own I say nothing, as they will
not go beyond squirely limits, though I make bold to say that, if it
be the practice in chivalry to write the achievements of squires, I
think mine must not be left out." "Thou speakest not amiss, Sancho,"
answered Don Quixote, "but before that point is reached it is
requisite to roam the world, as it were on probation, seeking
adventures, in order that, by achieving some, name and fame may be
acquired, such that when he betakes himself to the court of some great
monarch the knight may be already known by his deeds, and that the
boys, the instant they see him enter the gate of the city, may all
follow him and surround him, crying, 'This is the Knight of the
Sun'-or the Serpent, or any other title under which he may have
achieved great deeds. 'This,' they will say, 'is he who vanquished in
single combat the gigantic Brocabruno of mighty strength; he who
delivered the great Mameluke of Persia out of the long enchantment
under which he had been for almost nine hundred years.' So from one to
another they will go proclaiming his achievements; and presently at
the tumult of the boys and the others the king of that kingdom will
appear at the windows of his royal palace, and as soon as he beholds
the knight, recognising him by his arms and the device on his shield,
he will as a matter of course say, 'What ho! Forth all ye, the knights
of my court, to receive the flower of chivalry who cometh hither!' At
which command all will issue forth, and he himself, advancing half-way
down the stairs, will embrace him closely, and salute him, kissing him
on the cheek, and will then lead him to the queen's chamber, where the
knight will find her with the princess her daughter, who will be one
of the most beautiful and accomplished damsels that could with the
utmost pains be discovered anywhere in the known world. Straightway it
will come to pass that she will fix her eyes upon the knight and he
his upon her, and each will seem to the other something more divine
than human, and, without knowing how or why they will be taken and
entangled in the inextricable toils of love, and sorely distressed in
their hearts not to see any way of making their pains and sufferings
known by speech. Thence they will lead him, no doubt, to some richly
adorned chamber of the palace, where, having removed his armour, they
will bring him a rich mantle of scarlet wherewith to robe himself, and
if he looked noble in his armour he will look still more so in a
doublet. When night comes he will sup with the king, queen, and
princess; and all the time he will never take his eyes off her,
stealing stealthy glances, unnoticed by those present, and she will do
the same, and with equal cautiousness, being, as I have said, a damsel
of great discretion. The tables being removed, suddenly through the
door of the hall there will enter a hideous and diminutive dwarf
followed by a fair dame, between two giants, who comes with a certain
adventure, the work of an ancient sage; and he who shall achieve it
shall be deemed the best knight in the world. "The king will then
command all those present to essay it, and none will bring it to an
end and conclusion save the stranger knight, to the great enhancement
of his fame, whereat the princess will be overjoyed and will esteem
herself happy and fortunate in having fixed and placed her thoughts so
high. And the best of it is that this king, or prince, or whatever he
is, is engaged in a very bitter war with another as powerful as
himself, and the stranger knight, after having been some days at his
court, requests leave from him to go and serve him in the said war.
The king will grant it very readily, and the knight will courteously
kiss his hands for the favour done to him; and that night he will take
leave of his lady the princess at the grating of the chamber where she
sleeps, which looks upon a garden, and at which he has already many
times conversed with her, the go-between and confidante in the matter
being a damsel much trusted by the princess. He will sigh, she will
swoon, the damsel will fetch water, much distressed because morning
approaches, and for the honour of her lady he would not that they were
discovered; at last the princess will come to herself and will present
her white hands through the grating to the knight, who will kiss them
a thousand and a thousand times, bathing them with his tears. It will
be arranged between them how they are to inform each other of their
good or evil fortunes, and the princess will entreat him to make his
absence as short as possible, which he will promise to do with many
oaths; once more he kisses her hands, and takes his leave in such
grief that he is well-nigh ready to die. He betakes him thence to his
chamber, flings himself on his bed, cannot sleep for sorrow at
parting, rises early in the morning, goes to take leave of the king,
queen, and princess, and, as he takes his leave of the pair, it is
told him that the princess is indisposed and cannot receive a visit;
the knight thinks it is from grief at his departure, his heart is
pierced, and he is hardly able to keep from showing his pain. The
confidante is present, observes all, goes to tell her mistress, who
listens with tears and says that one of her greatest distresses is not
knowing who this knight is, and whether he is of kingly lineage or
not; the damsel assures her that so much courtesy, gentleness, and
gallantry of bearing as her knight possesses could not exist in any
save one who was royal and illustrious; her anxiety is thus relieved,
and she strives to be of good cheer lest she should excite suspicion
in her parents, and at the end of two days she appears in public.
Meanwhile the knight has taken his departure; he fights in the war,
conquers the king's enemy, wins many cities, triumphs in many battles,
returns to the court, sees his lady where he was wont to see her, and
it is agreed that he shall demand her in marriage of her parents as
the reward of his services; the king is unwilling to give her, as he
knows not who he is, but nevertheless, whether carried off or in
whatever other way it may be, the princess comes to be his bride, and
her father comes to regard it as very good fortune; for it so happens
that this knight is proved to be the son of a valiant king of some
kingdom, I know not what, for I fancy it is not likely to be on the
map. The father dies, the princess inherits, and in two words the
knight becomes king. And here comes in at once the bestowal of rewards
upon his squire and all who have aided him in rising to so exalted a
rank. He marries his squire to a damsel of the princess's, who will
be, no doubt, the one who was confidante in their amour, and is
daughter of a very great duke." "That's what I want, and no mistake
about it!" said Sancho. "That's what I'm waiting for; for all this,
word for word, is in store for your worship under the title of the
Knight of the Rueful Countenance." "Thou needst not doubt it, Sancho,"
replied Don Quixote, "for in the same manner, and by the same steps as
I have described here, knights-errant rise and have risen to be kings
and emperors; all we want now is to find out what king, Christian or
pagan, is at war and has a beautiful daughter, and that I have won
incredible fame throughout the universe, I know not how it can be made
out that I am of royal lineage, or even second cousin to an emperor;
for the king will not be willing to give me his daughter in marriage
unless he is first thoroughly satisfied on this point, however much my
famous deeds may deserve it; so that by this deficiency I fear I shall
lose what my arm has fairly earned. True it is I am a gentleman of
known house, of estate and property, and entitled to the five hundred
sueldos mulct; and it may be that the sage who shall write my history
will so clear up my ancestry and pedigree that I may find myself fifth
or sixth in descent from a king; for I would have thee know, Sancho,
if thou knowest it not, that with lovers the outward actions and
motions they give way to when their loves are in question are the
faithful messengers that carry the news of what is going on in the
depths of their hearts. Go, my friend, may better fortune than mine
attend thee, and bring thee a happier issue than that which I await in
dread in this dreary solitude." "I will go and return quickly," said
Sancho; "cheer up that little heart of yours, master mine, for at the
present moment you seem to have got one no bigger than a hazel nut;
remember what they say, that a stout heart breaks bad luck, and that
where there are no fletches there are no pegs; and moreover they say,
the hare jumps up where it's not looked for. I say this because, if we
could not find my lady's palaces or castles to-night, now that it is
daylight I count upon finding them when I least expect it, and once
found, leave it to me to manage her." "Verily, Sancho," said Don
Quixote, "thou dost always bring in thy proverbs happily, whatever we
deal with; may God give me better luck in what I am anxious about."
With this, Sancho wheeled about and gave Dapple the stick, and Don
Quixote remained behind, seated on his horse, resting in his stirrups
and leaning on the end of his lance, filled with sad and troubled
forebodings; and there we will leave him, and accompany Sancho, who
went off no less serious and troubled than he left his master; so much
so, that as soon as he had got out of the thicket, and looking round
saw that Don Quixote was not within sight, he dismounted from his ass,
and seating himself at the foot of a tree began to commune with
himself, saying, "Now, brother Sancho, let us know where your worship
is going. Are you going to look for some ass that has been lost? Not
at all. Then what are you going to look for? I am going to look for a
princess, that's all; and in her for the sun of beauty and the whole
heaven at once. And where do you expect to find all this, Sancho?
Where? Why, in the great city of El Toboso. Well, and for whom are you
going to look for her? For the famous knight Don Quixote of La Mancha,
and made him confess that my Casildea is more beautiful than his
Dulcinea; and in this one victory I hold myself to have conquered all
the knights in the world; for this Don Quixote that I speak of has
vanquished them all, and I having vanquished him, his glory, his fame,
and his honour have passed and are transferred to my person; for The
more the vanquished hath of fair renown, The greater glory gilds the
victor's crown. Thus the innumerable achievements of the said Don
Quixote are now set down to my account and have become mine." Don
Quixote was amazed when he heard the Knight of the Grove, and was a
thousand times on the point of telling him he lied, and had the lie
direct already on the tip of his tongue; but he restrained himself as
well as he could, in order to force him to confess the lie with his
own lips; so he said to him quietly, "As to what you say, sir knight,
about having vanquished most of the knights of Spain, or even of the
whole world, I say nothing; but that you have vanquished Don Quixote
of La Mancha I consider doubtful; it may have been some other that
resembled him, although there are few like him." "How! not
vanquished?" said he of the Grove; "by the heaven that is above us I
fought Don Quixote and overcame him and made him yield; and he is a
man of tall stature, gaunt features, long, lank limbs, with hair
turning grey, an aquiline nose rather hooked, and large black drooping
moustaches; he does battle under the name of 'The Countenance,' and he
has for squire a peasant called Sancho Panza; he presses the loins and
rules the reins of a famous steed called Rocinante; and lastly, he has
for the mistress of his will a certain Dulcinea del Toboso, once upon
a time called Aldonza Lorenzo, just as I call mine Casildea de
Vandalia because her name is Casilda and she is of Andalusia. If all
these tokens are not enough to vindicate the truth of what I say, here
is my sword, that will compel incredulity itself to give credence to
it." "Calm yourself, sir knight," said Don Quixote, "and give ear to
what I am about to say to you. I would have you know that this Don
Quixote you speak of is the greatest friend I have in the world; so
much so that I may say I regard him in the same light as my own
person; and from the precise and clear indications you have given I
cannot but think that he must be the very one you have vanquished. On
the other hand, I see with my eyes and feel with my hands that it is
impossible it can have been the same; unless indeed it be that, as he
has many enemies who are enchanters, and one in particular who is
always persecuting him, some one of these may have taken his shape in
order to allow himself to be vanquished, so as to defraud him of the
fame that his exalted achievements as a knight have earned and
acquired for him throughout the known world. And in confirmation of
this, I must tell you, too, that it is but ten hours since these said
enchanters his enemies transformed the shape and person of the fair
Dulcinea del Toboso into a foul and mean village lass, and in the same
way they must have transformed Don Quixote; and if all this does not
suffice to convince you of the truth of what I say, here is my sword,
that will compel incredulity itself to give credence to it." "Calm
yourself, sir knight," said Don Quixote, "and give ear to what I am
about to say to thee thou wilt be led to see the great error thou
wouldst commit. "Tell me, Anselmo, if Heaven or good fortune had made
thee master and lawful owner of a diamond of the finest quality, with
the excellence and purity of which all the lapidaries that had seen it
had been satisfied, saying with one voice and common consent that in
purity, quality, and fineness, it was all that a stone of the kind
could possibly be, thou thyself too being of the same belief, as
knowing nothing to the contrary, would it be reasonable in thee to
desire to take that diamond and place it between an anvil and a
hammer, and by mere force of blows and strength of arm try if it were
as hard and as fine as they said? And if thou didst, and if the stone
should resist so silly a test, that would add nothing to its value or
reputation; and if it were broken, as it might be, would not all be
lost? Undoubtedly it would, leaving its owner to be rated as a fool in
the opinion of all. Consider, then, Anselmo my friend, that Camilla is
a diamond of the finest quality as well in thy estimation as in that
of others, and that it is contrary to reason to expose her to the risk
of being broken; for if she remains intact she cannot rise to a higher
value than she now possesses; and if she give way and be unable to
resist, bethink thee now how thou wilt be deprived of her, and with
what good reason thou wilt complain of thyself for having been the
cause of her ruin and thine own. Remember there is no jewel in the
world so precious as a chaste and virtuous woman, and that the whole
honour of women consists in reputation; and since thy wife's is of
that high excellence that thou knowest, wherefore shouldst thou seek
to call that truth in question? Remember, my friend, that woman is an
imperfect animal, and that impediments are not to be placed in her way
to make her trip and fall, but that they should be removed, and her
path left clear of all obstacles, so that without hindrance she may
run her course freely to attain the desired perfection, which consists
in being virtuous. Naturalists tell us that the ermine is a little
animal which has a fur of purest white, and that when the hunters wish
to take it, they make use of this artifice. Having ascertained the
places which it frequents and passes, they stop the way to them with
mud, and then rousing it, drive it towards the spot, and as soon as
the ermine comes to the mud it halts, and allows itself to be taken
captive rather than pass through the mire, and spoil and sully its
whiteness, which it values more than life and liberty. The virtuous
and chaste woman is an ermine, and whiter and purer than snow is the
virtue of modesty; and he who wishes her not to lose it, but to keep
and preserve it, must adopt a course different from that employed with
the ermine; he must not put before her the mire of the gifts and
attentions of persevering lovers, because perhaps--and even without a
perhaps--she may not have sufficient virtue and natural strength in
herself to pass through and tread under foot these impediments; they
must be removed, and the brightness of virtue and the beauty of a fair
fame must be put before her. A virtuous woman, too, is like a mirror,
of clear shining crystal, liable to be tarnished and dimmed by every
breath that touches it. She must be treated as relics are; adored, not
touched. She must be protected and prized as one protects and prizes a
fair garden full of roses and flowers, the owner of which allows no
one to trespass or pluck a blossom; enough for others that from afar
and through the iron grating they may enjoy its fragrance and its
beauty. Finally let me repeat to thee some verses that come to my
mind; I heard them in a modern comedy, and it seems to me they bear
upon the point we are discussing. A prudent old man was giving advice
to another, the father of a young girl, to lock her up, watch over her
and keep her in seclusion, and among other arguments he used these:
Woman is a thing of glass; But her brittleness 'tis best Not too
curiously to test: Who knows what may come to pass? Breaking is an
easy matter, And it's folly to expose What you cannot mend to blows;
What you can't make whole to shatter. This, then, all may hold as
true, And the reason's plain to see; For if Danaes there be, There are
golden showers too. "All that I have said to thee so far, Anselmo, has
had reference to what concerns thee; now it is right that I should say
something of what regards myself; and if I be prolix, pardon me, for
the labyrinth into which thou hast entered and from which thou wouldst
have me extricate thee makes it necessary. "Thou dost reckon me thy
friend, and thou wouldst rob me of honour, a thing wholly inconsistent
with friendship; and not only dost thou aim at this, but thou wouldst
have me rob thee of it is beyond a doubt, for Camilla, seeing that I
press my suit upon her, will suppose that I have perceived in her
something light that has encouraged me to make known to her my base
desire; and if she holds herself dishonoured, her dishonour touches
thee as belonging to her; and hence arises what so commonly takes
place, that the husband of the adulterous woman, though he may not be
aware of or have given any cause for his wife's failure in her duty,
or (being careless or negligent) have had it in his power to prevent
his dishonour, nevertheless is stigmatised by a vile and reproachful
name, and in a manner regarded with eyes of contempt instead of pity
by all who know of his wife's guilt, though they see that he is
unfortunate not by his own fault, but by the lust of a vicious
consort. But I will tell thee why with good reason dishonour attaches
to the husband of the unchaste wife, though he know not that she is
so, nor be to blame, nor have done anything, or given any provocation
to make her so; and be not weary with listening to me, for it will be
for thy good. "When God created our first parent in the earthly
paradise, the Holy Scripture says that he infused sleep into Adam and
while he slept took a rib from his left side of which he formed our
mother Eve, and when Adam awoke and beheld her he said, 'This is flesh
of my flesh, and bone of my bone.' And God said 'For this shall a man
leave his father and his mother, and they shall be two in one flesh;
and then was instituted the divine sacrament of marriage, with such
ties that death alone can loose them. And such is the force and virtue
of this miraculous sacrament that it makes two different persons one
and the same flesh; and even more than this when the virtuous are
married; for though they have two souls they have but one will. And
hence it follows that as the flesh of the wife is one and the same
with that of her husband the stains that may come upon it, or the
injuries it incurs fall upon the husband's flesh, though he, as has
been said, may have given no cause for them; for as the pain of the
foot or any member of the body is felt by the whole body, because all
is one flesh, as the head feels the hurt to the ankle without having
caused it, so the husband, being one with her, shares the dishonour of
the wife; and as all worldly honour or dishonour comes of flesh and
blood, and the erring wife's is of that kind, the husband must needs
bear his part of it and be held dishonoured without knowing it. See,
then, Anselmo, the peril thou art encountering in seeking to disturb
the peace of thy virtuous consort; see for what an empty and
ill-advised curiosity thou wouldst rouse up passions that now repose
in quiet in the breast of thy chaste wife; reflect that what thou art
staking all to win is little, and what thou wilt lose so much that I
leave it undescribed, not having the words to express it. But if all I
have said be not enough to turn thee from thy vile purpose, thou must
seek some other instrument for thy dishonour and misfortune; for such
I will not consent to be, though I lose thy friendship, the greatest
loss that I can conceive." Having said this, the wise and virtuous
Lothario was silent, and Anselmo, troubled in mind and deep in
thought, was unable for a while to utter a word in reply; but at
length he said, "I have listened, Lothario my friend, attentively, as
thou hast seen, to what thou hast chosen to say to me, and in thy
arguments, examples, and comparisons I have seen that high
intelligence thou dost possess, and the perfection of true friendship
thou hast reached; and likewise I see and confess that if I am not
guided by thy opinion, but follow my own, I am flying from the good
and pursuing the evil. This being so, thou must remember that I am now
labouring under that infirmity which women sometimes suffer from, when
the craving seizes them to eat clay, plaster, charcoal, and things
even worse, disgusting to look at, much more to eat; so that it will
be necessary to have recourse to some artifice to cure me; and this
can be easily effected if only thou wilt make a beginning, even though
it be in a lukewarm and make-believe fashion, to pay court to Camilla,
who will not be so yielding that her virtue will give way at the first
attack: with this mere attempt I shall rest satisfied, and thou wilt
have done what our friendship binds thee to do, not only in giving me
life, but in persuading me not to discard my honour. And this thou art
bound to do for one reason alone, that, being, as I am, resolved to
apply this test, it is not for thee to permit me to reveal my weakness
to another, and so imperil that honour thou art striving to keep me
from losing; and if thine may not stand as high as it ought in the
estimation of Camilla while thou art paying court to her, that is of
little or no importance, because ere long, on finding in her that
constancy which we expect, thou canst tell her the plain truth as
regards our stratagem, and so regain thy place in her esteem; and as
thou art venturing so little, and by the venture canst afford me so
much satisfaction, refuse not to undertake it, even if further
difficulties present themselves to thee; for, as I have said, if thou
wilt only make a beginning I will acknowledge the issue decided."
Lothario seeing the fixed determination of Anselmo, and not knowing
what further examples to offer or arguments to urge in order to
dissuade him from it, and perceiving that he threatened to confide his
pernicious scheme to some one else, to avoid a greater evil resolved
to gratify him and do what he asked, intending to manage the business
so as to satisfy Anselmo without corrupting the mind of Camilla; so in
reply he told him not to communicate his purpose to any other, for he
would undertake the task himself, and would begin it as soon as he
pleased. Anselmo embraced him warmly and affectionately, and thanked
him for his offer as if he had bestowed some great favour upon him;
and it was agreed between them to set about it the next day, Anselmo
affording opportunity and time to Lothario to converse alone with
Camilla, and furnishing him with money and jewels to offer and present
to her. He suggested, too, that he should treat her to music, and
write verses in her praise, and if he was unwilling to take the
trouble of composing them, he offered to do it himself. Lothario
agreed to all with an intention very different from what Anselmo
supposed, and with this understanding they returned to Anselmo's
house, where they found Camilla awaiting her husband anxiously and
uneasily, for he was later than usual in returning that day. Lothario
repaired to his own house, and Anselmo remained in his, as well
satisfied as Lothario was troubled in mind; for he could see no
satisfactory way out of this ill-advised business. That night,
however, he thought of a plan by which he might deceive Anselmo
without any injury to Camilla. The next day he went to dine with his
friend, and was welcomed by Camilla, who received and treated him with
great cordiality, knowing the affection her husband felt for him. When
dinner was over and the cloth removed, Anselmo told Lothario to stay
there with Camilla while he attended to some pressing business, as he
would return in an hour and a half. Camilla begged him not to go, and
Lothario offered to accompany him, but nothing could persuade Anselmo,
who on the contrary pressed Lothario to remain waiting for him as he
had a matter of great importance to discuss with him. At the same time
he bade Camilla not to leave Lothario alone until he came back. In
short he contrived to put so good a face on the reason, or the folly,
of his absence that no one could have suspected it was a pretence.
Anselmo took his departure, and Camilla and Lothario were left alone
at the table, for the rest of the household had gone to dinner.
Lothario saw himself in the lists according to his friend's wish, and
facing an enemy that could by her beauty alone vanquish a squadron of
armed knights; judge whether he had good reason to fear; but what he
did was to lean his elbow on the arm of the chair, and his cheek upon
his hand, and, asking Camilla's pardon for his ill manners, he said he
wished to take a little sleep until Anselmo returned. Camilla in reply
said he could repose more at his ease in the reception-room than in
his chair, and begged of him to go in and sleep there; but Lothario
declined, and there he remained asleep until the return of Anselmo,
who finding Camilla in her own room, and Lothario asleep, imagined
that he had stayed away so long as to have afforded them time enough
for conversation and even for sleep, and was all impatience until
Lothario should wake up, that he might go out with him and question
him as to his success. Everything fell out as he wished; Lothario
awoke, and the two at once left the house, and Anselmo asked what he
was anxious to know, and Lothario in answer told him that he had not
thought it advisable to declare himself entirely the first time, and
therefore had only extolled the charms of Camilla, telling her that
all the city spoke of nothing else but her beauty and wit, for this
seemed to him an excellent way of beginning to gain her good-will and
render her disposed to listen to him with pleasure the next time, thus
availing himself of the device the devil has recourse to when he would
deceive one who is on the watch; for he being the angel of darkness
transforms himself into an angel of light, and, under cover of a fair
seeming, discloses himself at length, and effects his purpose if at
the beginning his wiles are not discovered. All this gave great
satisfaction to Anselmo, and he said he would afford the same
opportunity every day, but without leaving the house, for he would
find things to do at home so that Camilla should not detect the plot.
Thus, then, several days went by, and Lothario, without uttering a
word to Camilla, reported to Anselmo that he had talked with her and
that he had never been able to draw from her the slightest indication
of consent to anything dishonourable, nor even a sign or shadow of
hope; on the contrary, he said she would inform her husband of it. "So
far well," said Anselmo; "Camilla has thus far resisted words; we must
now see how she will resist deeds. I will give you to-morrow two
thousand crowns in gold for you to offer or even present, and as many
more to buy jewels to lure her, for women are fond of being becomingly
attired and going gaily dressed, and all the more so if they are
beautiful, however chaste they may be; and if she resists this
temptation, I will rest satisfied and will give you no more trouble."
Lothario replied that now he had begun he would carry on the
undertaking to the end, though he perceived he was to come out of it
wearied and vanquished. The next day he received the four thousand
crowns, and with them four thousand perplexities, for he knew not what
to say by way of a new falsehood; but in the end he made up his mind
to tell him that Camilla stood as firm against gifts and promises as
against words, and that there was no use in taking any further
trouble, for the time was all spent to no purpose. But chance,
directing things in a different manner, so ordered it that Anselmo,
having left Lothario and Camilla alone as on other occasions, shut
himself into a chamber and posted himself to watch and listen through
the keyhole to what passed between them, and perceived that for more
than half an hour Lothario did not utter a word to Camilla, nor would
utter a word though he were to be there for an age; and he came to the
conclusion that what his friend had told him about the replies of
Camilla was all invention and falsehood, and to ascertain if it were
so, he came out, and calling Lothario aside asked him what news he had
and in what humour Camilla was. Lothario replied that he was not
disposed to go on with the business, for she had answered him so
angrily and harshly that he had no heart to say anything more to her.
"Ah, Lothario, Lothario," said Anselmo, "how ill dost thou meet thy
obligations to me, and the great confidence I repose in thee! I have
been just now watching through this keyhole, and I have seen that thou
has not said a word to Camilla, whence I conclude that on the former
occasions thou hast not spoken to her either, and if this be so, as no
doubt it is, what a fool Quiteria would be to refuse the fine dresses
and jewels Camacho must have given her and will give her, and take
Basilio's bar-throwing and sword-play. They won't give a pint of wine
at the tavern for a good cast of the bar or a neat thrust of the
sword. Talents and accomplishments that can't be turned into money,
let Count Dirlos have them; but when such gifts fall to one that has
hard cash, I wish my condition of life was as becoming as they are. On
a good foundation you can raise a good building, and the best
foundation in the world is money." "For God's sake, Sancho," said Don
Quixote here, "stop that harangue; it is my belief, if thou wert
allowed to continue all thou beginnest every instant, thou wouldst
have no time left for eating or sleeping; for thou wouldst spend it
all in talking." "If your worship had a good memory," replied Sancho,
"you would remember the articles of our agreement before we started
from home this last time; one of them was that I was to be let say all
I liked, so long as it was not against my neighbour or your worship's
authority; and so far, it seems to me, I have not broken the said
article." "I remember no such article, Sancho," said Don Quixote; "and
even if it were so, I desire you to hold your tongue and come along;
for the instruments we heard last night are already beginning to
enliven the valleys again, and no doubt the marriage will take place
in the cool of the morning, and not in the heat of the afternoon."
Sancho did as his master bade him, and putting the saddle on Rocinante
and the pack-saddle on Dapple, they both mounted and at a leisurely
pace entered the arcade. The first thing that presented itself to
Sancho's eyes was a whole ox spitted on a whole elm tree, and in the
fire at which it was to be roasted there was burning a middling-sized
mountain of faggots, and six stewpots that stood round the blaze had
not been made in the ordinary mould of common pots, for they were six
half wine-jars, each fit to hold the contents of a slaughter-house;
they swallowed up whole sheep and hid them away in their insides
without showing any more sign of them than if they were pigeons.
Countless were the hares ready skinned and the plucked fowls that hung
on the trees for burial in the pots, numberless the wildfowl and game
of various sorts suspended from the branches that the air might keep
them cool. Sancho counted more than sixty wine skins of over six
gallons each, and all filled, as it proved afterwards, with generous
wines. There were, besides, piles of the whitest bread, like the heaps
of corn one sees on the threshing-floors. There was a wall made of
cheeses arranged like open brick-work, and two cauldrons full of oil,
bigger than those of a dyer's shop, served for cooking fritters, which
when fried were taken out with two mighty shovels, and plunged into
another cauldron of prepared honey that stood close by. Of cooks and
cook-maids there were over fifty, all clean, brisk, and blithe. In the
capacious belly of the ox were a dozen soft little sucking-pigs,
which, sewn up there, served to give it tenderness and flavour. The
spices of different kinds did not seem to have been bought by the
pound but by the quarter, and all lay open to view in a great chest.
In short, all the preparations made for the wedding were in rustic
style, but abundant enough to feed an army. Sancho observed all,
contemplated all, and everything won his heart. The first to captivate
and take his fancy were the pots, out of which he would have very
gladly helped himself to a moderate pipkinful; then the wine skins
secured his affections; and lastly, the produce of the frying-pans,
if, indeed, such imposing cauldrons may be called frying-pans; and
unable to control himself or bear it any longer, he approached one of
the busy cooks and civilly but hungrily begged permission to soak a
scrap of bread in one of the pots; to which the cook made answer,
"Brother, this is not a day on which hunger is to have any sway,
thanks to the rich Camacho; get down and look about for a ladle and
skim off a hen or two, and much good may they do you." "I don't see
one," said Sancho. "Wait a bit," said the cook; "sinner that I am! how
particular and bashful you are!" and so saying, he seized a bucket and
plunging it into one of the half jars took up three hens and a couple
of geese, and said to Sancho, "Fall to, friend, and take the edge off
your appetite with these skimmings until dinner-time comes." "I have
nothing to put them in," said Sancho. "Well then," said the cook,
"take spoon and all; for Camacho's wealth and happiness furnish
everything." While Sancho fared thus, Don Quixote was watching the
entrance, at one end of the arcade, of some twelve peasants, all in
holiday and gala dress, mounted on twelve beautiful mares with rich
handsome field trappings and a number of little bells attached to
their petrals, who, marshalled in regular order, ran not one but
several courses over the meadow, with jubilant shouts and cries of
"Long live Camacho and Quiteria! he as rich as she is fair; and she
the fairest on earth!" Hearing this, Don Quixote said to himself, "It
is easy to see these folk have never seen my Dulcinea del Toboso; for
if they had they would be more moderate in their praises of this
Quiteria of theirs." Shortly after this, several bands of dancers of
various sorts began to enter the arcade at different points, and among
them one of sword-dancers composed of some four-and-twenty lads of
gallant and high-spirited mien, clad in the finest and whitest of
linen, and with handkerchiefs embroidered in various colours with fine
silk; and one of those on the mares asked an active youth who led them
if any of the dancers had been wounded. "As yet, thank God, no one has
been wounded," said he, "we are all safe and sound;" and he at once
began to execute complicated figures with the rest of his comrades,
with so many turns and so great dexterity, that although Don Quixote
was well used to see dances of the same kind, he thought he had never
seen any so good as this. He also admired another that came in
composed of fair young maidens, none of whom seemed to be under
fourteen or over eighteen years of age, all clad in green stuff, with
their locks partly braided, partly flowing loose, but all of such
bright gold as to vie with the sunbeams, and over them they wore
garlands of jessamine, roses, amaranth, and honeysuckle. At their head
were a venerable old man and an ancient dame, more brisk and active,
however, than might have been expected from their years. The notes of
a Zamora bagpipe accompanied them, and with modesty in their
countenances and in their eyes, and lightness in their feet, they
looked the best dancers in the world. Following these there came an
artistic dance of the sort they call "speaking dances." It was
composed of eight nymphs in two files, with the god Cupid leading one
and Interest the other, the former furnished with wings, bow, quiver
and arrows, the latter in a rich dress of gold and silk of divers
colours. The nymphs that followed Love bore their names written on
white parchment in large letters on their backs. "Poetry" was the name
of the first, "Wit" of the second, "Birth" of the third, and "Valour"
of the fourth. Those that followed Interest were distinguished in the
same way; the badge of the first announced "Liberality," that of the
second "Largess," the third "Treasure," and the fourth "Peaceful
Possession." In front of them all came a wooden castle drawn by four
wild men, all clad in ivy and hemp stained green, and looking so
natural that they nearly terrified Sancho. On the front of the castle
and on each of the four sides of its frame it bore the inscription
"Castle of Caution." Four skillful tabor and flute players accompanied
them, and the dance having been opened, Cupid, after executing two
figures, raised his eyes and bent his bow against a damsel who stood
between the turrets of the castle, and thus addressed her: I am the
mighty God whose sway Is potent over land and sea. The heavens above
us own me; nay, The shades below acknowledge me. I know not fear, I
have my will, Whate'er my whim or fancy be; For me there's no
impossible, I order, bind, forbid, set free. Having concluded the
stanza he discharged an arrow at the top of the castle, and went back
to his place. Interest then came forward and went through two more
figures, and as soon as the tabors ceased, he said: But mightier than
Love am I, Though Love it be that leads me on, Than mine no lineage is
more high, Or older, underneath the sun. To use me rightly few know
how, To act without me fewer still, For I am Interest, and I vow For
evermore to do thy will. Interest retired, and Poetry came forward,
and when she had gone through her figures like the others, fixing her
eyes on the damsel of the castle, she said: With many a fanciful
conceit, Fair Lady, winsome Poesy Her soul, an offering at thy feet,
Presents in sonnets unto thee. If thou my homage wilt not scorn, Thy
fortune, watched by envious eyes, On wings of poesy upborne Shall be
exalted to the skies. Poetry withdrew, and on the side of Interest
Liberality advanced, and after having gone through her figures, said:
To give, while shunning each extreme, The sparing hand, the over-free,
Therein consists, so wise men deem, The virtue Liberality. But thee,
fair lady, to enrich, Myself a prodigal I'll prove, A vice not wholly
shameful, which May find its fair excuse in love. In the same manner
all the characters of the two bands advanced and retired, and each
executed its figures, and delivered its verses, some of them graceful,
some burlesque, but Don Quixote's memory (though he had an excellent
one) only carried away those that have been just quoted. All then
mingled together, forming chains and breaking off again with graceful,
unconstrained gaiety; and whenever Love passed in front of the castle
he shot his arrows up at it, while Interest broke gilded pellets
against it. At length, after they had danced a good while, Interest
drew out a great purse, made of the skin of a large brindled cat and
to all appearance full of money, and flung it at the castle, and with
the force of the blow the boards fell asunder and tumbled down,
leaving the damsel exposed and unprotected. Interest and the
characters of his band advanced, and throwing a great chain of gold
over her neck pretended to take her and lead her away captive, on
seeing which, Love and his supporters made as though they would
release her, the whole action being to the accompaniment of the tabors
and in the form of a regular dance. The wild men made peace between
them, and with great dexterity readjusted and fixed the boards of the
castle, and the damsel once more ensconced herself within; and with
this the dance wound up, to the great enjoyment of the beholders. Don
Quixote asked one of the nymphs who it was that had composed and
arranged it. She replied that it was a beneficiary of the town who had
a nice taste in devising things of the sort. "I will lay a wager,"
said Don Quixote, "that the same bachelor or beneficiary is a greater
friend of Camacho's than of Basilio's, and that he is better at satire
than at vespers; he has introduced the accomplishments of Basilio and
the riches of Camacho very neatly into the dance." Sancho Panza, who
was listening to all this, exclaimed, "The king is my cock; I stick to
Camacho." "It is easy to see thou art a clown, Sancho," said Don
Quixote, "and one of that sort that cry 'Long life to the conqueror.'"
"I don't know of what sort I am," returned Sancho, "but I know very
well I'll never get such elegant skimmings off Basilio's pots as these
I have got off Camacho's;" and he showed him the bucketful of geese
and hens, and seizing one began to eat with great gaiety and appetite,
saying, "A fig for the accomplishments of Basilio! As much as thou
hast so much art thou worth, and as much as thou art worth so much
hast thou. As a grandmother of mine used to say, there are only two
families in the world, the Haves and the Haven'ts; and she stuck to
the Haves; and to this day, Senor Don Quixote, people would sooner
feel the pulse of 'Have,' than of 'Know;' an ass covered with gold
looks better than a horse with a pack-saddle. So once more I say I
stick to Camacho, the bountiful skimmings of whose pots are geese and
hens, hares and rabbits; but of Basilio's, if any ever come to hand,
or even to foot, they'll be only rinsings." "Hast thou finished thy
harangue, Sancho?" said Don Quixote. "Of course I have finished it,"
replied Sancho, "because I see your worship takes offence at it; but
if it was not for that, there was work enough cut out for three days."
"God grant I may see thee dumb before I die, Sancho," said Don
Quixote. "At the rate we are going," said Sancho, "I'll be chewing
clay before your worship dies; and then, maybe, I'll be so dumb that
I'll not say a word until the end of the world, or, at least, till the
day of judgment." "Even should that happen, O Sancho," said Don
Quixote, "thy silence will never come up to all thou hast talked, art
talking, and wilt talk all thy life; moreover, it naturally stands to
reason, that my death will come before thine; so I never expect to see
thee dumb, not even when thou art drinking or sleeping, and that is
the utmost I can say." "In good faith, senor," replied Sancho,
"there's no trusting that fleshless one, I mean Death, who devours the
lamb as soon as the sheep, and, as I have heard our curate say, treads
with equal foot upon the lofty towers of kings and the lowly huts of
the poor. That lady is more mighty than dainty, she is no way
squeamish, she devours all and is ready for all, and fills her
alforjas with people of all sorts, ages, and ranks. She is no reaper
that sleeps out the noontide; at all times she is reaping and cutting
down, as well the dry grass as the green; she never seems to chew, but
bolts and swallows all that is put before her, for she has a canine
appetite that is never satisfied; and though she has no belly, she
shows she has a dropsy and is athirst to drink the lives of all that
live, as one would drink a jug of cold water." "Say no more, Sancho,"
said Don Quixote at this; "don't try to better it, and risk a fall;
for in truth what thou hast said about death in thy rustic phrase is
what a good preacher might have said. I tell thee, Sancho, if thou
hadst discretion equal to thy mother wit, thou mightst take a pulpit
in hand, and go about the world preaching fine sermons; but I say of
him that, when he begins stringing maxims together and giving advice
not only might he take a pulpit in hand, but two on each finger, and
go into the market-places to his heart's content. Devil take you for a
knight-errant, what a lot of things you know! I used to think in my
heart that the only thing he knew was what belonged to his chivalry;
but there is nothing he won't have a finger in." Sancho muttered this
somewhat aloud, and his master overheard him, and asked, "What art
thou muttering there, Sancho?" "I'm not saying anything or muttering
anything," said Sancho; "I was only saying to myself that I wish I had
heard what your worship has said just now before I married; perhaps
I'd say now, 'The ox that's loose licks himself well.'" "Is thy Teresa
so bad then, Sancho?" "She is not very bad," replied Sancho; "but she
is not very good; at least she is not as good as I could wish." "Thou
dost wrong, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "to speak ill of thy wife; for
after all she is the mother of thy children." "We are quits," returned
Sancho; "for she speaks ill of me whenever she takes it into her head,
especially when she is jealous; and Satan himself could not put up
with her then." In fine, they remained three days with the newly
married couple, by whom they were entertained and treated like kings.
Don Quixote begged the fencing licentiate to find him a guide to show
him the way to the cave of Montesinos, as he had a great desire to
enter it and see with his own eyes if the wonderful tales that were
told of it all over the country were true. The licentiate said he
would get him a cousin of his own, a famous scholar, and one very much
given to reading books of chivalry, who would have great pleasure in
conducting him to the mouth of the very cave, and would show him the
lakes of Ruidera, which were likewise famous all over La Mancha, and
even all over Spain; and he assured him he would find him
entertaining, for he was a youth who could write books good enough to
be printed and dedicated to princes. The cousin arrived at last,
leading an ass in foal, with a pack-saddle covered with a
parti-coloured carpet or sackcloth; Sancho saddled Rocinante, got
Dapple ready, and stocked his alforjas, along with which went those of
the cousin, likewise well filled; and so, commending themselves to God
and bidding farewell to all, they set out, taking the road for the
famous cave of Montesinos. On the way Don Quixote asked the cousin of
what sort and character his pursuits, avocations, and studies were, to
which he replied that he was by profession a humanist, and that his
pursuits and studies were making books for the press, all of great
utility and no less entertainment to the nation. One was called "The
Book of Liveries," in which he described seven hundred and three
liveries, with their colours, mottoes, and ciphers, from which
gentlemen of the court might pick and choose any they fancied for
festivals and revels, without having to go a-begging for them from
anyone, or puzzling their brains, as the saying is, to have them
appropriate to their objects and purposes; "for," said he, "I give the
jealous, the rejected, the forgotten, the absent, what will suit them,
and fit them without fail. I have another book, too, which I shall
call 'Metamorphoses, or the Spanish Ovid,' one of rare and original
invention, for imitating Ovid in burlesque style, I show in it who the
Giralda of Seville and the Angel of the Magdalena were, what the sewer
of Vecinguerra at Cordova was, what the bulls of Guisando, the Sierra
Morena, the Leganitos and Lavapies fountains at Madrid, not forgetting
those of the Piojo, of the Cano Dorado, and of the Priora; and all
with their allegories, metaphors, and changes, so that they are
amusing, interesting, and instructive, all at once. Another book I
have which I call 'The Supplement to Polydore Vergil,' which treats of
the invention of things, and is a work of great erudition and
research, for I establish and elucidate elegantly some things of great
importance which Polydore omitted to mention. He forgot to tell us who
was the first man in the world that had a cold in his head, and who
was the first to try salivation for the French disease, but I give it
accurately set forth, and quote more than five-and-twenty authors in
proof of it, so you may perceive I have laboured to good purpose and
that the book will be of service to the whole world." Sancho, who had
been very attentive to the cousin's words, said to him, "Tell me,
senor--and God give you luck in printing your books-can you tell me
(for of course you know, as you know everything) who was the first man
that scratched his head? For to my thinking it must have been our
father Adam." "So it must," replied the cousin; "for there is no doubt
but Adam had a head and hair; and being the first man in the world he
would have scratched himself sometimes." "So I think," said Sancho;
"but now tell me, who was the first tumbler in the world?" "Really,
brother," answered the cousin, "I could not at this moment say
positively without having investigated it; I will look it up when I go
back to where I have my books, and will satisfy you the next time we
meet, for this will not be the last time." "Look here, senor," said
Sancho, "don't give yourself any trouble about it, for I have just
this minute hit upon what I asked you. The first tumbler in the world,
you must know, was Lucifer, when they cast or pitched him out of
heaven; for he came tumbling into the bottomless pit." "You are right,
friend," said the cousin; and said Don Quixote, "Sancho, that question
and answer are not thine own; thou hast heard them from some one
else." "Hold your peace, senor," said Sancho; "faith, if I take to
asking questions and answering, I'll go on from this till to-morrow
morning. Nay! to ask foolish things and answer nonsense I needn't go
looking for help from my neighbours." "Thou hast said more than thou
art aware of, Sancho," said Don Quixote; "for there are some who weary
themselves out in learning and proving things that, after they are
known and proved, are not worth a farthing to the understanding or
memory." In this and other pleasant conversation the day went by, and
that night they put up at a small hamlet whence it was not more than
two leagues to the cave of Montesinos, so the cousin told Don Quixote,
adding, that if he was bent upon entering it, it would be requisite
for him to provide himself with ropes, so that he might be tied and
lowered into its depths. Don Quixote said that even if it reached to
the bottomless pit he meant to see where it went to; so they bought
about a hundred fathoms of rope, and next day at two in the afternoon
they arrived at the cave, the mouth of which is spacious and wide, but
full of thorn and wild-fig bushes and brambles and briars, so thick
and matted that they completely close it up and cover it over. On
coming within sight of it the cousin, Sancho, and Don Quixote
dismounted, and the first two immediately tied the latter very firmly
with the ropes, and as they were girding and swathing him Sancho said
to him, "Mind what you are about, master mine; don't go burying
yourself alive, or putting yourself where you'll be like a bottle put
to cool in a well; it's no affair or business of your worship's to
become the explorer of this, which must be worse than a Moorish
dungeon." "Tie me and hold thy peace," said Don Quixote, "for an
emprise like this, friend Sancho, was reserved for me;" and said the
guide, "I beg of you, Senor Don Quixote, to observe carefully and
examine with a hundred eyes everything that is within there; perhaps
there may be some things for me to put into my book of
'Transformations.'" "The drum is in hands that will know how to beat
it well enough," said Sancho Panza. When he had said this and finished
the tying (which was not over the armour but only over the doublet)
Don Quixote observed, "It was careless of us not to have provided
ourselves with a small cattle-bell to be tied on the rope close to me,
the sound of which would show that I was still descending and alive;
but as that is out of the question now, in God's hand be it to guide
me;" and forthwith he fell on his knees and in a low voice offered up
a prayer to heaven, imploring God to aid him and grant him success in
this to all appearance perilous and untried adventure, and then
exclaimed aloud, "O mistress of my actions and movements, illustrious
and peerless Dulcinea del Toboso, if so be the prayers and
supplications of this fortunate lover can reach thy ears, by thy
incomparable beauty I entreat thee to listen to them, for they but ask
thee not to refuse me thy favour and protection now that I stand in
such need of them. I am about to precipitate, to sink, to plunge
myself into the abyss that is here before me, only to let the world
know that while thou dost favour me there is no impossibility I will
not attempt and accomplish." With these words he approached the
cavern, and perceived that it was impossible to let himself down or
effect an entrance except by sheer force or cleaving a passage; so
drawing his sword he began to demolish and cut away the brambles at
the mouth of the cave, at the noise of which a vast multitude of crows
and choughs flew out of it so thick and so fast that they knocked Don
Quixote down; and if he had been as much of a believer in augury as he
was a Catholic Christian he would have taken it as a bad omen and
declined to bury himself in such a place. He got up, however, and as
there came no more crows, or night-birds like the bats that flew out
at the same time with the crows, the cousin and Sancho giving him
rope, he lowered himself into the depths of the dread cavern; and as
he entered it Sancho sent his blessing after him, making a thousand
crosses over him and saying, "God, and the Pena de Francia, and the
Trinity of Gaeta guide thee, flower and cream of knights-errant. There
thou goest, thou dare-devil of the earth, heart of steel, arm of
brass; once more, God guide thee and send thee back safe, sound, and
unhurt to the light of this world thou art leaving to bury thyself in
the darkness thou art seeking there;" and the cousin offered up almost
the same prayers and supplications. Don Quixote kept calling to them
to give him rope and more rope, and they gave it out little by little,
and by the time the calls, which came out of the cave as out of a
pipe, ceased to be heard they had let down the hundred fathoms of
rope. They were inclined to pull Don Quixote up again, as they could
give him no more rope; however, they waited about half an hour, at the
end of which time they began to gather in the rope again with great
ease and without feeling any weight, which made them fancy Don Quixote
was remaining below; and persuaded that it was so, Sancho wept
bitterly, and hauled away in great haste in order to settle the
question. When, however, they had come to, as it seemed, rather more
than eighty fathoms they felt a weight, at which they were greatly
delighted; and at last, at ten fathoms more, they saw Don Quixote
distinctly, and Sancho called out to him, saying, "Welcome back,
senor, for we had begun to think you were going to stop there to found
a family." But Don Quixote answered not a word, and drawing him out
entirely they perceived he had his eyes shut and every appearance of
being fast asleep. They stretched him on the ground and untied him,
but still he did not awake; however, they rolled him back and forwards
and shook and pulled him about, so that after some time he came to
himself, stretching himself just as if he were waking up from a deep
and sound sleep, and looking about him he said, "God forgive you,
friends; ye have taken me away from the sweetest and most delightful
existence and spectacle that ever human being enjoyed or beheld. Now
indeed do I know that all the pleasures of this life pass away like a
shadow and a dream, or fade like the flower of the field. O ill-fated
Montesinos! O sore-wounded Durandarte! O unhappy Belerma! O tearful
Guadiana, and ye O hapless daughters of Ruidera who show in your waves
the tears that flowed from your beauteous eyes!" The cousin and Sancho
Panza listened with deep attention to the words of Don Quixote, who
uttered them as though with immense pain he drew them up from his very
bowels. They begged of him to explain himself, and tell them what he
had seen in that hell down there. "Hell do you call it?" said Don
Quixote; "call it by no such name, for it does not deserve it, as ye
shall soon see." He then begged them to give him something to eat, as
he was very hungry. They spread the cousin's sackcloth on the grass,
and put the stores of the alforjas into requisition, and all three
sitting down lovingly and sociably, they made a luncheon and a supper
of it all in one; and when the sackcloth was removed, Don Quixote of
La Mancha said, "Let no one rise, and attend to me, my sons, both of
you." CHAPTER XXIII. OF THE WONDERFUL THINGS THE INCOMPARABLE DON
QUIXOTE SAID HE SAW IN THE PROFOUND CAVE OF MONTESINOS, THE
IMPOSSIBILITY AND MAGNITUDE OF WHICH CAUSE THIS ADVENTURE TO BE DEEMED
APOCRYPHAL It was about four in the afternoon when the sun, veiled in
clouds, with subdued light and tempered beams, enabled Don Quixote to
relate, without heat or inconvenience, what he had seen in the cave of
Montesinos to his two illustrious hearers, and he began as follows: "A
matter of some twelve or fourteen times a man's height down in this
pit, on the right-hand side, there is a recess or space, roomy enough
to contain a large cart with its mules. A little light reaches it
through some chinks or crevices, communicating with it and open to the
surface of the earth. This recess or space I perceived when I was
already growing weary and disgusted at finding myself hanging
suspended by the rope, travelling downwards into that dark region
without any certainty or knowledge of where I was going, so I resolved
to enter it and rest myself for a while. I called out, telling you not
to let out more rope until I bade you, but you cannot have heard me. I
then gathered in the rope you were sending me, and making a coil or
pile of it I seated myself upon it, ruminating and considering what I
was to do to lower myself to the bottom, having no one to hold me up;
and as I was thus deep in thought and perplexity, suddenly and without
provocation a profound sleep fell upon me, and when I least expected
it, I know not how, I awoke and found myself in the midst of the most
beautiful, delightful meadow that nature could produce or the most
lively human imagination conceive. I opened my eyes, I rubbed them,
and found I was not asleep but thoroughly awake. Nevertheless, I felt
my head and breast to satisfy myself whether it was I myself who was
there or some empty delusive phantom; but touch, feeling, the
collected thoughts that passed through my mind, all convinced me that
I was the same then and there that I am this moment. Next there
presented itself to my sight a stately royal palace or castle, with
walls that seemed built of clear transparent crystal; and through two
great doors that opened wide therein, I saw coming forth and advancing
towards me a venerable old man, clad in a long gown of
mulberry-coloured serge that trailed upon the ground. On his shoulders
and breast he had a green satin collegiate hood, and covering his head
a black Milanese bonnet, and his snow-white beard fell below his
girdle. He carried no arms whatever, nothing but a rosary of beads
bigger than fair-sized filberts, each tenth bead being like a moderate
ostrich egg; his bearing, his gait, his dignity and imposing presence
held me spellbound and wondering. He approached me, and the first
thing he did was to go and look at his books, and not finding the room
where he had left it, he wandered from side to side looking for it. He
came to the place where the door used to be, and tried it with his
hands, and turned and twisted his eyes in every direction without
saying a word; but after a good while he asked his housekeeper
whereabouts was the room that held his books. The housekeeper, who had
been already well instructed in what she was to answer, said, "What
room or what nothing is it that your worship is looking for? There are
neither room nor books in this house now, for the devil himself has
carried all away." "It was not the devil," said the niece, "but a
magician who came on a cloud one night after the day your worship left
this, and dismounting from a serpent that he rode he entered the room,
and what he did there I know not, but after a little while he made
off, flying through the roof, and left the house full of smoke; and
when we went to see what he had done we saw neither book nor room: but
we remember very well, the housekeeper and I, that on leaving, the old
villain said in a loud voice that, for a private grudge he owed the
owner of the books and the room, he had done mischief in that house
that would be discovered by-and-by: he said too that his name was the
Sage Munaton." "He must have said Friston," said Don Quixote. "I don't
know whether he called himself Friston or Friton," said the
housekeeper, "I only know that his name ended with 'ton.'" "So it
does," said Don Quixote, "and he is a sage magician, a great enemy of
mine, who has a spite against me because he knows by his arts and lore
that in process of time I am to engage in single combat with a knight
whom he befriends and that I am to conquer, and he will be unable to
prevent it; and for this reason he endeavours to do me all the ill
turns that he can; but I promise him it will be hard for him to oppose
or avoid what is decreed by Heaven." "Who doubts that?" said the
niece; "but, uncle, who mixes you up in these quarrels? Would it not
be better to remain at peace in your own house instead of roaming the
world looking for better bread than ever came of wheat, never
reflecting that many go for wool and come back shorn?" "Oh, niece of
mine," replied Don Quixote, "how much astray art thou in thy
reckoning: ere they shear me I shall have plucked away and stripped
off the beards of all who dare to touch only the tip of a hair of
mine." The two were unwilling to make any further answer, as they saw
that his anger was kindling. In short, then, he remained at home
fifteen days very quietly without showing any signs of a desire to
take up with his former delusions, and during this time he held lively
discussions with his two gossips, the curate and the barber, on the
point he maintained, that knights-errant were what the world stood
most in need of, and that in him was to be accomplished the revival of
knight-errantry. The curate sometimes contradicted him, sometimes
agreed with him, for if he had not observed this precaution he would
have been unable to bring him to reason. Meanwhile Don Quixote worked
upon a farm labourer, a neighbour of his, an honest man (if indeed
that title can be given to him who is poor), but with very little wit
in his pate. In a word, he so talked him over, and with such
persuasions and promises, that the poor clown made up his mind to
sally forth with him and serve him as esquire. Don Quixote, among
other things, told him he ought to be ready to go with him gladly,
because any moment an adventure might occur that might win an island
in the twinkling of an eye and leave him governor of it. On these and
the like promises Sancho Panza (for so the labourer was called) left
wife and children, and engaged himself as esquire to his neighbour.
Don Quixote next set about getting some money; and selling one thing
and pawning another, and making a bad bargain in every case, he got
together a fair sum. He provided himself with a buckler, which he
begged as a loan from a friend, and, restoring his battered helmet as
best he could, he warned his squire Sancho of the day and hour he
meant to set out, that he might provide himself with what he thought
most needful. Above all, he charged him to take alforjas with him. The
other said he would, and that he meant to take also a very good ass he
had, as he was not much given to going on foot. About the ass, Don
Quixote hesitated a little, trying whether he could call to mind any
knight-errant taking with him an esquire mounted on ass-back, but no
instance occurred to his memory. For all that, however, he determined
to take him, intending to furnish him with a more honourable mount
when a chance of it presented itself, by appropriating the horse of
the first discourteous knight he encountered. Himself he provided with
shirts and such other things as he could, according to the advice the
host had given him; all which being done, without taking leave, Sancho
Panza of his wife and children, or Don Quixote of his housekeeper and
niece, they sallied forth unseen by anybody from the village one
night, and made such good way in the course of it that by daylight
they held themselves safe from discovery, even should search be made
for them. Sancho rode on his ass like a patriarch, with his alforjas
and bota, and longing to see himself soon governor of the island his
master had promised him. Don Quixote decided upon taking the same
route and road he had taken on his first journey, that over the Campo
de Montiel, which he travelled with less discomfort than on the last
occasion, for, as it was early morning and the rays of the sun fell on
them obliquely, the heat did not distress them. And now said Sancho
Panza to his master, "Your worship will take care, Senor
Knight-errant, not to forget about the island you have promised me,
for be it ever so big I'll be equal to governing it." To which Don
Quixote replied, "Thou must take notice, brother Sancho, that this
adventure and those like it are not adventures of islands, but of
cross-roads, in which nothing is got except a broken head or an ear
the less: have patience, for adventures will present themselves from
which I may make you, not only a governor, but something more." Sancho
gave him many thanks, and again kissing his hand and the skirt of his
hauberk, helped him to mount Rocinante, and mounting his ass himself,
proceeded to follow his master, who at a brisk pace, without taking
leave, or saying anything further to the ladies belonging to the
coach, turned into a wood that was hard by. Sancho followed him at his
ass's best trot, but Rocinante stepped out so that, seeing himself
left behind, he was forced to call to his master to wait for him. Don
Quixote did so, reining in Rocinante until his weary squire came up,
who on reaching him said, "It seems to me, senor, it would be prudent
in us to go and take refuge in some church, for, seeing how mauled he
with whom you fought has been left, it will be no wonder if they give
information of the affair to the Holy Brotherhood and arrest us, and,
faith, if they do, before we come out of gaol we shall have to sweat
for it." "Peace," said Don Quixote; "where hast thou ever heard of
castles and royal palaces being built in alleys without an outlet?"
"Senor," replied Sancho, "every country has a way of its own; perhaps
here in El Toboso it is the way to build palaces and grand buildings
in alleys; so I entreat your worship to let me search about among
these streets or alleys before me, and perhaps, in some corner or
other, I may stumble on this palace--and I wish I saw the dogs eating
it for leading us such a dance." "Speak respectfully of what belongs
to my lady, Sancho," said Don Quixote; "let us keep the feast in
peace, and not throw the rope after the bucket." "I'll hold my
tongue," said Sancho, "but how am I to take it patiently when your
worship wants me, with only once seeing the house of our mistress, to
know always, and find it in the middle of the night, when your worship
can't find it, who must have seen it thousands of times?" "Thou wilt
drive me to desperation, Sancho," said Don Quixote. "Look here,
heretic, have I not told thee a thousand times that I have never once
in my life seen the peerless Dulcinea or crossed the threshold of her
palace, and that I am enamoured solely by hearsay and by the great
reputation she bears for beauty and discretion?" "I hear it now,"
returned Sancho; "and I may tell you that if you have not seen her, no
more have I." "That cannot be," said Don Quixote, "for, at any rate,
thou saidst, on bringing back the answer to the letter I sent by thee,
that thou sawest her sifting wheat." "Don't mind that, senor," said
Sancho; "I must tell you that my seeing her and the answer I brought
you back were by hearsay too, for I can no more tell who the lady
Dulcinea is than I can hit the sky." "Sancho, Sancho," said Don
Quixote, "there are times for jests and times when jests are out of
place; if I tell thee that I have neither seen nor spoken to the lady
of my heart, it is no reason why thou shouldst say thou hast not
spoken to her or seen her, when the contrary is the case, as thou well
knowest." While the two were engaged in this conversation, they
perceived some one with a pair of mules approaching the spot where
they stood, and from the noise the plough made, as it dragged along
the ground, they guessed him to be some labourer who had got up before
daybreak to go to his work, and so it proved to be. He came along
singing the ballad that says-- Ill did ye fare, ye men of France, In
Roncesvalles chase-- "May I die, Sancho," said Don Quixote, when he
heard him, "if any good will come to us tonight! Dost thou not hear
what that clown is singing?" "I do," said Sancho, "but what has
Roncesvalles chase to do with what we have in hand? He might just as
well be singing the ballad of Calainos, for any good or ill that can
come to us in our business." By this time the labourer had come up,
and Don Quixote asked him, "Can you tell me, worthy friend, and God
speed you, whereabouts here is the palace of the peerless princess
Dona Dulcinea del Toboso?" "Senor," replied the lad, "I am a stranger,
and I have been only a few days in the town, doing farm work for a
rich farmer. In that house opposite there live the curate of the
village and the sacristan, and both or either of them will be able to
give your worship some account of this lady princess, for they have a
list of all the people of El Toboso; though it is my belief there is
not a princess living in the whole of it; many ladies there are, of
quality, and in her own house each of them may be a princess." "Well,
then, she I am inquiring for will be one of these, my friend," said
Don Quixote. "May be so," replied the lad; "God be with you, for here
comes the daylight;" and without waiting for any more of his
questions, he whipped on his mules. Sancho, seeing his master downcast
and somewhat dissatisfied, said to him, "Senor, daylight will be here
before long, and it will not do for us to uncover ourselves, for he
who has us in charge will be responsible for us; and perhaps we are
gaining an altitude and mounting up to enable us to descend at one
swoop on the kingdom of Kandy, as the saker or falcon does on the
heron, so as to seize it however high it may soar; and though it seems
to us not half an hour since we left the garden, believe me we must
have travelled a great distance." "I don't know how that may be," said
Sancho; "all I know is that if the Senora Magallanes or Magalona was
satisfied with this croup, she could not have been very tender of
flesh." The duke, the duchess, and all in the garden were listening to
the conversation of the two heroes, and were beyond measure amused by
it; and now, desirous of putting a finishing touch to this rare and
well-contrived adventure, they applied a light to Clavileno's tail
with some tow, and the horse, being full of squibs and crackers,
immediately blew up with a prodigious noise, and brought Don Quixote
and Sancho Panza to the ground half singed. By this time the bearded
band of duennas, the Trifaldi and all, had vanished from the garden,
and those that remained lay stretched on the ground as if in a swoon.
Don Quixote and Sancho got up rather shaken, and, looking about them,
were filled with amazement at finding themselves in the same garden
from which they had started, and seeing such a number of people
stretched on the ground; and their astonishment was increased when at
one side of the garden they perceived a tall lance planted in the
ground, and hanging from it by two cords of green silk a smooth white
parchment on which there was the following inscription in large gold
letters: "The illustrious knight Don Quixote of La Mancha has, by
merely attempting it, finished and concluded the adventure of the
Countess Trifaldi, otherwise called the Distressed Duenna; Malambruno
is now satisfied on every point, the chins of the duennas are now
smooth and clean, and King Don Clavijo and Queen Antonomasia in their
original form; and when the squirely flagellation shall have been
completed, the white dove shall find herself delivered from the
pestiferous gerfalcons that persecute her, and in the arms of her
beloved mate; for such is the decree of the sage Merlin,
arch-enchanter of enchanters." As soon as Don Quixote had read the
inscription on the parchment he perceived clearly that it referred to
the disenchantment of Dulcinea, and returning hearty thanks to heaven
that he had with so little danger achieved so grand an exploit as to
restore to their former complexion the countenances of those venerable
duennas, he advanced towards the duke and duchess, who had not yet
come to themselves, and taking the duke by the hand he said, "Be of
good cheer, worthy sir, be of good cheer; it's nothing at all; the
adventure is now over and without any harm done, as the inscription
fixed on this post shows plainly." The duke came to himself slowly and
like one recovering consciousness after a heavy sleep, and the duchess
and all who had fallen prostrate about the garden did the same, with
such demonstrations of wonder and amazement that they would have
almost persuaded one that what they pretended so adroitly in jest had
happened to them in reality. The duke read the placard with half-shut
eyes, and then ran to embrace Don Quixote with-open arms, declaring
him to be the best knight that had ever been seen in any age. Sancho
kept looking about for the Distressed One, to see what her face was
like without the beard, and if she was as fair as her elegant person
promised; but they told him that, the instant Clavileno descended
flaming through the air and came to the ground, the whole band of
duennas with the Trifaldi vanished, and that they were already shaved
and without a stump left. The duchess asked Sancho how he had fared on
that long journey, to which Sancho replied, "I felt, senora, that we
were flying through the region of fire, as my master told me, and I
wanted to uncover my eyes for a bit; but my master, when I asked leave
to uncover myself, would not let me; but as I have a little bit of
curiosity about me, and a desire to know what is forbidden and kept
from me, quietly and without anyone seeing me I drew aside the
handkerchief covering my eyes ever so little, close to my nose, and
from underneath looked towards the earth, and it seemed to me that it
was altogether no bigger than a grain of mustard seed, and that the
men walking on it were little bigger than hazel nuts; so you may see
how high we must have got to then." To this the duchess said, "Sancho,
my friend, mind what you are saying; it seems you could not have seen
the earth, but only the men walking on it; for if the earth looked to
you like a grain of mustard seed, and each man like a hazel nut, one
man alone would have covered the whole earth." "That is true," said
Sancho, "but for all that I got a glimpse of a bit of one side of it,
and saw it all." "Take care, Sancho," said the duchess, "with a bit of
one side one does not see the whole of what one looks at." "I don't
understand that way of looking at things," said Sancho; "I only know
that your ladyship will do well to bear in mind that as we were flying
by enchantment so I might have seen the whole earth and all the men by
enchantment whatever way I looked; and if you won't believe this, no
more will you believe that, uncovering myself nearly to the eyebrows,
I saw myself so close to the sky that there was not a palm and a half
between me and it; and by everything that I can swear by, senora, it
is mighty great! And it so happened we came by where the seven goats
are, and by God and upon my soul, as in my youth I was a goatherd in
my own country, as soon as I saw them I felt a longing to be among
them for a little, and if I had not given way to it I think I'd have
burst. So I come and take, and what do I do? without saying anything
to anybody, not even to my master, softly and quietly I got down from
Clavileno and amused myself with the goats--which are like violets,
like flowers--for nigh three-quarters of an hour; and Clavileno never
stirred or moved from one spot." "And while the good Sancho was
amusing himself with the goats," said the duke, "how did Senor Don
Quixote amuse himself?" To which Don Quixote replied, "As all these
things and such like occurrences are out of the ordinary course of
nature, it is no wonder that Sancho says what he does; for my own part
I can only say that I did not uncover my eyes either above or below,
nor did I see sky or earth or sea or shore. It is true I felt that I
was passing through the region of the air, and even that I touched
that of fire; but that we passed farther I cannot believe; for the
region of fire being between the heaven of the moon and the last
region of the air, we could not have reached that heaven where the
seven goats Sancho speaks of are without being burned; and as we were
not burned, either Sancho is lying or Sancho is dreaming." "I am
neither lying nor dreaming," said Sancho; "only ask me the tokens of
those same goats, and you'll see by that whether I'm telling the truth
or not." "Tell us them then, Sancho," said the duchess. "Two of them,"
said Sancho, "are green, two blood-red, two blue, and one a mixture of
all colours." "An odd sort of goat, that," said the duke; "in this
earthly region of ours we have no such colours; I mean goats of such
colours." "That's very plain," said Sancho; "of course there must be a
difference between the goats of heaven and the goats of the earth."
"Tell me, Sancho," said the duke, "did you see any he-goat among those
goats?" "No, senor," said Sancho; "but I have heard say that none ever
passed the horns of the moon." They did not care to ask him anything
more about his journey, for they saw he was in the vein to go rambling
all over the heavens giving an account of everything that went on
there, without having ever stirred from the garden. Such, in short,
was the end of the adventure of the Distressed Duenna, which gave the
duke and duchess laughing matter not only for the time being, but for
all their lives, and Sancho something to talk about for ages, if he
lived so long; but Don Quixote, coming close to his ear, said to him,
"Sancho, as you would have us believe what you saw in heaven, I
require you to believe me as to what I saw in the cave of Montesinos;
I say no more." CHAPTER XLII. OF THE COUNSELS WHICH DON QUIXOTE GAVE
SANCHO PANZA BEFORE HE SET OUT TO GOVERN THE ISLAND, TOGETHER WITH
OTHER WELL-CONSIDERED MATTERS The duke and duchess were so well
pleased with the successful and droll result of the adventure of the
Distressed One, that they resolved to carry on the joke, seeing what a
fit subject they had to deal with for making it all pass for reality.
So having laid their plans and given instructions to their servants
and vassals how to behave to Sancho in his government of the promised
island, the next day, that following Clavileno's flight, the duke told
Sancho to prepare and get ready to go and be governor, for his
islanders were already looking out for him as for the showers of May.
Sancho made him an obeisance, and said, "Ever since I came down from
heaven, and from the top of it beheld the earth, and saw how little it
is, the great desire I had to be a governor has been partly cooled in
me; for what is there grand in being ruler on a grain of mustard seed,
or what dignity or authority in governing half a dozen men about as
big as hazel nuts; for, so far as I could see, there were no more on
the whole earth? If your lordship would be so good as to give me ever
so small a bit of heaven, were it no more than half a league, I'd
rather have it than the best island in the world." "Recollect,
Sancho," said the duke, "I cannot give a bit of heaven, no not so much
as the breadth of my nail, to anyone; rewards and favours of that sort
are reserved for God alone. What I can give I give you, and that is a
real, genuine island, compact, well proportioned, and uncommonly
fertile and fruitful, where, if you know how to use your
opportunities, you may, with the help of the world's riches, gain
those of heaven." "Well then," said Sancho, "let the island come; and
I'll try and be such a governor, that in spite of scoundrels I'll go
to heaven; and it's not from any craving to quit my own humble
condition or better myself, but from the desire I have to try what it
tastes like to be a governor." "If you once make trial of it, Sancho,"
said the duke, "you'll eat your fingers off after the government, so
sweet a thing is it to command and be obeyed. Depend upon it when your
master comes to be emperor (as he will beyond a doubt from the course
his affairs are taking), it will be no easy matter to wrest the
dignity from him, and he will be sore and sorry at heart to have been
so long without becoming one." "Senor," said Sancho, "it is my belief
it's a good thing to be in command, if it's only over a drove of
cattle." "May I be buried with you, Sancho," said the duke, "but you
know everything; I hope you will make as good a governor as your
sagacity promises; and that is all I have to say; and now remember
to-morrow is the day you must set out for the government of the
island, and this evening they will provide you with the proper attire
for you to wear, and all things requisite for your departure." "Let
them dress me as they like," said Sancho; "however I'm dressed I'll be
Sancho Panza." "That's true," said the duke; "but one's dress must be
suited to the office or rank one holds; for it would not do for a
jurist to dress like a soldier, or a soldier like a priest. You,
Sancho, shall go partly as a lawyer, partly as a captain, for, in the
island I am giving you, arms are needed as much as letters, and
letters as much as arms." "Of letters I know but little," said Sancho,
"for I don't even know the A B C; but it is enough for me to have the
Christus in my memory to be a good governor. As for arms, I'll handle
those they give me till I drop, and then, God be my help!" "With so
good a memory," said the duke, "Sancho cannot go wrong in anything."
Here Don Quixote joined them; and learning what passed, and how soon
Sancho was to go to his government, he with the duke's permission took
him by the hand, and retired to his room with him for the purpose of
giving him advice as to how he was to demean himself in his office. As
soon as they had entered the chamber he closed the door after him, and
almost by force made Sancho sit down beside him, and in a quiet tone
thus addressed him: "I give infinite thanks to heaven, friend Sancho,
that, before I have met with any good luck, fortune has come forward
to meet thee. I who counted upon my good fortune to discharge the
recompense of thy services, find myself still waiting for advancement,
while thou, before the time, and contrary to all reasonable
expectation, seest thyself blessed in the fulfillment of thy desires.
Some will bribe, beg, solicit, rise early, entreat, persist, without
attaining the object of their suit; while another comes, and without
knowing why or wherefore, finds himself invested with the place or
office so many have sued for; and here it is that the common saying,
'There is good luck as well as bad luck in suits,' applies. Thou, who,
to my thinking, art beyond all doubt a dullard, without early rising
or night watching or taking any trouble, with the mere breath of
knight-errantry that has breathed upon thee, seest thyself without
more ado governor of an island, as though it were a mere matter of
course. This I say, Sancho, that thou attribute not the favour thou
hast received to thine own merits, but give thanks to heaven that
disposes matters beneficently, and secondly thanks to the great power
the profession of knight-errantry contains in itself. With a heart,
then, inclined to believe what I have said to thee, attend, my son, to
thy Cato here who would counsel thee and be thy polestar and guide to
direct and pilot thee to a safe haven out of this stormy sea wherein
thou art about to ingulf thyself; for offices and great trusts are
nothing else but a mighty gulf of troubles. "First of all, my son,
thou must fear God, for in the fear of him is wisdom, and being wise
thou canst not err in aught. "Secondly, thou must keep in view what
thou art, striving to know thyself, the most difficult thing to know
that the mind can imagine. If thou knowest thyself, it will follow
thou wilt not puff thyself up like the frog that strove to make
himself as large as the ox; if thou dost, the recollection of having
kept pigs in thine own country will serve as the ugly feet for the
wheel of thy folly." "That's the truth," said Sancho; "but that was
when I was a boy; afterwards when I was something more of a man it was
geese I kept, not pigs. But to my thinking that has nothing to do with
it; for all who are governors don't come of a kingly stock." "True,"
said Don Quixote, "and for that reason those who are not of noble
origin should take care that the dignity of the office they hold he
accompanied by a gentle suavity, which wisely managed will save them
from the sneers of malice that no station escapes. "Glory in thy
humble birth, Sancho, and be not ashamed of saying thou art
peasant-born; for when it is seen thou art not ashamed no one will set
himself to put thee to the blush; and pride thyself rather upon being
one of lowly virtue than a lofty sinner. Countless are they who, born
of mean parentage, have risen to the highest dignities, pontifical and
imperial, and of the truth of this I could give thee instances enough
to weary thee. "Remember, Sancho, if thou make virtue thy aim, and
take a pride in doing virtuous actions, thou wilt have no cause to
envy those who have princely and lordly ones, for blood is an
inheritance, but virtue an acquisition, and virtue has in itself alone
a worth that blood does not possess. "This being so, if perchance
anyone of thy kinsfolk should come to see thee when thou art in thine
island, thou art not to repel or slight him, but on the contrary to
welcome him, entertain him, and make much of him; for in so doing thou
wilt be approved of heaven (which is not pleased that any should
despise what it hath made), and wilt comply with the laws of
well-ordered nature. "If thou carriest thy wife with thee (and it is
not well for those that administer governments to be long without
their wives), teach and instruct her, and strive to smooth down her
natural roughness; for all that may be gained by a wise governor may
be lost and wasted by a boorish stupid wife. "If perchance thou art
left a widower--a thing which may happen--and in virtue of thy office
seekest a consort of higher degree, choose not one to serve thee for a
hook, or for a fishing-rod, or for the hood of thy 'won't have it;'
for verily, I tell thee, for all the judge's wife receives, the
husband will be held accountable at the general calling to account;
where he will have repay in death fourfold, items that in life he
regarded as naught. "Never go by arbitrary law, which is so much
favoured by ignorant men who plume themselves on cleverness. "Let the
tears of the poor man find with thee more compassion, but not more
justice, than the pleadings of the rich. "Strive to lay bare the
truth, as well amid the promises and presents of the rich man, as amid
the sobs and entreaties of the poor. "When equity may and should be
brought into play, press not the utmost rigour of the law against the
guilty; for the reputation of the stern judge stands not higher than
that of the compassionate. "If perchance thou permittest the staff of
justice to swerve, let it be not by the weight of a gift, but by that
of mercy. "If it should happen thee to give judgment in the cause of
one who is thine enemy, turn thy thoughts away from thy injury and fix
them on the justice of the case. "Let not thine own passion blind thee
in another man's cause; for the errors thou wilt thus commit will be
most frequently irremediable; or if not, only to be remedied at the
expense of thy good name and even of thy fortune. "If any handsome
woman come to seek justice of thee, turn away thine eyes from her
tears and thine ears from her lamentations, and consider deliberately
the merits of her demand, if thou wouldst not have thy reason swept
away by her weeping, and thy rectitude by her sighs. "Abuse not by
word him whom thou hast to punish in deed, for the pain of punishment
is enough for the unfortunate without the addition of thine
objurgations. "Bear in mind that the culprit who comes under thy
jurisdiction is but a miserable man subject to all the propensities of
our depraved nature, and so far as may be in thy power show thyself
lenient and forbearing; for though the attributes of God are all
equal, to our eyes that of mercy is brighter and loftier than that of
justice. "If thou followest these precepts and rules, Sancho, thy days
will be long, thy fame eternal, thy reward abundant, thy felicity
unutterable; thou wilt marry thy children as thou wouldst; they and
thy grandchildren will bear titles; thou wilt live in peace and
concord with all men; and, when life draws to a close, death will come
to thee in calm and ripe old age, and the light and loving hands of
thy great-grandchildren will close thine eyes. "What I have thus far
addressed to thee are instructions for the adornment of thy mind;
listen now to those which tend to that of the body." CHAPTER XLIII. OF
THE SECOND SET OF COUNSELS DON QUIXOTE GAVE SANCHO PANZA CHAPTER XLIV
HOW SANCHO PANZA WAS CONDUCTED TO HIS GOVERNMENT, AND OF THE STRANGE
ADVENTURE THAT BEFELL DON QUIXOTE IN THE WHOLE COURSE OF THIS GREAT
HISTORY CHAPTER LXX WHICH FOLLOWS SIXTY-NINE AND DEALS WITH MATTERS
INDISPENSABLE FOR THE CLEAR COMPREHENSION OF THIS HISTORY CHAPTER LXXI
OF WHAT PASSED BETWEEN DON QUIXOTE AND HIS SQUIRE, TOGETHER WITH OTHER
VERY NOTABLE INCIDENTS The instant the housekeeper saw Sancho Panza
shut himself in with her master, she guessed what they were about; and
suspecting that the result of the consultation would be a resolve to
undertake a third sally, she seized her mantle, and in deep anxiety
and distress, ran to find the bachelor Samson Carrasco, as she thought
that, being a well-spoken man, and a new friend of her master's, he
might be able to persuade him to give up any such crazy notion. She
found him pacing the patio of his house, and, perspiring and flurried,
she fell at his feet the moment she saw him. Carrasco, seeing how
distressed and overcome she was, said to her, "What is this, mistress
housekeeper? What has happened to you? One would think you
heart-broken." "Nothing, Senor Samson," said she, "only that my master
is breaking out, plainly breaking out." "Whereabouts is he breaking
out, senora?" asked Samson; "has any part of his body burst?" "He is
only breaking out at the door of his madness," she replied; "I mean,
dear senor bachelor, that he is going to break out again (and this
will be the third time) to hunt all over the world for what he calls
ventures, though I can't make out why he gives them that name. The
first time he was brought back to us slung across the back of an ass,
and belaboured all over; and the second time he came in an ox-cart,
shut up in a cage, in which he persuaded himself he was enchanted, and
the poor creature was in such a state that the mother that bore him
would not have known him; lean, yellow, with his eyes sunk deep in the
cells of his skull; so that to bring him round again, ever so little,
cost me more than six hundred eggs, as God knows, and all the world,
and my hens too, that won't let me tell a lie." "That I can well
believe," replied the bachelor, "for they are so good and so fat, and
so well-bred, that they would not say one thing for another, though
they were to burst for it. In short then, mistress housekeeper, that
is all, and there is nothing the matter, except what it is feared Don
Quixote may do?" "No, senor," said she. "Well then," returned the
bachelor, "don't be uneasy, but go home in peace; get me ready
something hot for breakfast, and while you are on the way say the
prayer of Santa Apollonia, that is if you know it; for I will come
presently and you will see miracles." "Woe is me," cried the
housekeeper, "is it the prayer of Santa Apollonia you would have me
say? That would do if it was the toothache my master had; but it is in
the brains, what he has got." "I know what I am saying, mistress
housekeeper; go, and don't set yourself to argue with me, for you know
I am a bachelor of Salamanca, and one can't be more of a bachelor than
that," replied Carrasco; and with this the housekeeper retired, and
the bachelor went to look for the curate, and arrange with him what
will be told in its proper place. While Don Quixote and Sancho were
shut up together, they had a discussion which the history records with
great precision and scrupulous exactness. Sancho said to his master,
"Senor, I have educed my wife to let me go with your worship wherever
you choose to take me." "Induced, you should say, Sancho," said Don
Quixote; "not educed." "Once or twice, as well as I remember," replied
Sancho, "I have begged of your worship not to mend my words, if so be
as you understand what I mean by them; and if you don't understand
them to say 'Sancho,' or 'devil,' 'I don't understand thee; and if I
don't make my meaning plain, then you may correct me, for I am so
focile-" "I don't understand thee, Sancho," said Don Quixote at once;
"for I know not what 'I am so focile' means." "'So focile' means I am
so much that way," replied Sancho. "I understand thee still less now,"
said Don Quixote. "Well, if you can't understand me," said Sancho, "I
don't know how to put it; I know no more, God help me." "Oh, now I
have hit it," said Don Quixote; "thou wouldst say thou art so docile,
tractable, and gentle that thou wilt take what I say to thee, and
submit to what I teach thee." "I would bet," said Sancho, "that from
the very first you understood me, and knew what I meant, but you
wanted to put me out that you might hear me make another couple of
dozen blunders." "May be so," replied Don Quixote; "but to come to the
point, what does Teresa say?" "Teresa says," replied Sancho, "that I
should make sure with your worship, and 'let papers speak and beards
be still,' for 'he who binds does not wrangle,' since one 'take' is
better than two 'I'll give thee's;' and I say a woman's advice is no
great thing, and he who won't take it is a fool." "And so say I," said
Don Quixote; "continue, Sancho my friend; go on; you talk pearls
to-day." "The fact is," continued Sancho, "that, as your worship knows
better than I do, we are all of us liable to death, and to-day we are,
and to-morrow we are not, and the lamb goes as soon as the sheep, and
nobody can promise himself more hours of life in this world than God
may be pleased to give him; for death is deaf, and when it comes to
knock at our life's door, it is always urgent, and neither prayers,
nor struggles, nor sceptres, nor mitres, can keep it back, as common
talk and report say, and as they tell us from the pulpits every day."
"All that is very true," said Don Quixote; "but I cannot make out what
thou art driving at." "What I am driving at," said Sancho, "is that
your worship settle some fixed wages for me, to be paid monthly while
I am in your service, and that the same he paid me out of your estate;
for I don't care to stand on rewards which either come late, or ill,
or never at all; God help me with my own. In short, I would like to
know what I am to get, be it much or little; for the hen will lay on
one egg, and many littles make a much, and so long as one gains
something there is nothing lost. To be sure, if it should happen (what
I neither believe nor expect) that your worship were to give me that
island you have promised me, I am not so ungrateful nor so grasping
but that I would be willing to have the revenue of such island valued
and stopped out of my wages in due promotion." "Sancho, my friend,"
replied Don Quixote, "sometimes proportion may be as good as
promotion." "I see," said Sancho; "I'll bet I ought to have said
proportion, and not promotion; but it is no matter, as your worship
has understood me." "And so well understood," returned Don Quixote,
"that I have seen into the depths of thy thoughts, and know the mark
thou art shooting at with the countless shafts of thy proverbs. Look
here, Sancho, I would readily fix thy wages if I had ever found any
instance in the histories of the knights-errant to show or indicate,
by the slightest hint, what their squires used to get monthly or
yearly; but I have read all or the best part of their histories, and I
cannot remember reading of any knight-errant having assigned fixed
wages to his squire; I only know that they all served on reward, and
that when they least expected it, if good luck attended their masters,
they found themselves recompensed with an island or something
equivalent to it, or at the least they were left with a title and
lordship. If with these hopes and additional inducements you, Sancho,
please to return to my service, well and good; but to suppose that I
am going to travel on foot, and make long ones, is to suppose
nonsense." "Thou sayest well, Sancho," said Don Quixote; "let my
armour be hung up for a trophy, and under it or round it we will carve
on the trees what was inscribed on the trophy of Roland's armour--
These let none move Who dareth not his might with Roland prove.'"
"Although mine is of the Cachopins of Laredo," said the traveller, "I
will not venture to compare it with that of El Toboso of La Mancha,
though, to tell the truth, no such surname has until now ever reached
my ears." "What!" said Don Quixote, "has that never reached them?" The
rest of the party went along listening with great attention to the
conversation of the pair, and even the very goatherds and shepherds
perceived how exceedingly out of his wits our Don Quixote was. Sancho
Panza alone thought that what his master said was the truth, knowing
who he was and having known him from his birth; and all that he felt
any difficulty in believing was that about the fair Dulcinea del
Toboso, because neither any such name nor any such princess had ever
come to his knowledge though he lived so close to El Toboso. They were
going along conversing in this way, when they saw descending a gap
between two high mountains some twenty shepherds, all clad in
sheepskins of black wool, and crowned with garlands which, as
afterwards appeared, were, some of them of yew, some of cypress. Six
of the number were carrying a bier covered with a great variety of
flowers and branches, on seeing which one of the goatherds said,
"Those who come there are the bearers of Chrysostom's body, and the
foot of that mountain is the place where he ordered them to bury him."
They therefore made haste to reach the spot, and did so by the time
those who came had laid the bier upon the ground, and four of them
with sharp pickaxes were digging a grave by the side of a hard rock.
They greeted each other courteously, and then Don Quixote and those
who accompanied him turned to examine the bier, and on it, covered
with flowers, they saw a dead body in the dress of a shepherd, to all
appearance of one thirty years of age, and showing even in death that
in life he had been of comely features and gallant bearing. Around him
on the bier itself were laid some books, and several papers open and
folded; and those who were looking on as well as those who were
opening the grave and all the others who were there preserved a
strange silence, until one of those who had borne the body said to
another, "Observe carefully, Ambrosia if this is the place Chrysostom
spoke of, since you are anxious that what he directed in his will
should be so strictly complied with." "This is the place," answered
Ambrosia "for in it many a time did my poor friend tell me the story
of his hard fortune. Here it was, he told me, that he saw for the
first time that mortal enemy of the human race, and here, too, for the
first time he declared to her his passion, as honourable as it was
devoted, and here it was that at last Marcela ended by scorning and
rejecting him so as to bring the tragedy of his wretched life to a
close; here, in memory of misfortunes so great, he desired to be laid
in the bowels of eternal oblivion." Then turning to Don Quixote and
the travellers he went on to say, "That body, sirs, on which you are
looking with compassionate eyes, was the abode of a soul on which
Heaven bestowed a vast share of its riches. That is the body of
Chrysostom, who was unrivalled in wit, unequalled in courtesy,
unapproached in gentle bearing, a phoenix in friendship, generous
without limit, grave without arrogance, gay without vulgarity, and, in
short, first in all that constitutes goodness and second to none in
all that makes up misfortune. He loved deeply, he was hated; he
adored, he was scorned; he wooed a wild beast, he pleaded with marble,
he pursued the wind, he cried to the wilderness, he served
ingratitude, and for reward was made the prey of death in the
mid-course of life, cut short by a shepherdess whom he sought to
immortalise in the memory of man, as these papers which you see could
fully prove, had he not commanded me to consign them to the fire after
having consigned his body to the earth." "You would deal with them
more harshly and cruelly than their owner himself," said Vivaldo, "for
it is neither right nor proper to do the will of one who enjoins what
is wholly unreasonable; it would not have been reasonable in Augustus
Caesar had he permitted the directions left by the divine Mantuan in
his will to be carried into effect. So that, Senor Ambrosia while you
consign your friend's body to the earth, you should not consign his
writings to oblivion, for if he gave the order in bitterness of heart,
it is not right that you should irrationally obey it. On the contrary,
by granting life to those papers, let the cruelty of Marcela live for
ever, to serve as a warning in ages to come to all men to shun and
avoid falling into like danger; or I and all of us who have come here
know already the story of this your love-stricken and heart-broken
friend, and we know, too, your friendship, and the cause of his death,
and the directions he gave at the close of his life; from which sad
story may be gathered how great was the cruelty of Marcela, the love
of Chrysostom, and the loyalty of your friendship, together with the
end awaiting those who pursue rashly the path that insane passion
opens to their eyes. Last night we learned the death of Chrysostom and
that he was to be buried here, and out of curiosity and pity we left
our direct road and resolved to come and see with our eyes that which
when heard of had so moved our compassion, and in consideration of
that compassion and our desire to prove it if we might by condolence,
we beg of you, excellent Ambrosia, or at least I on my own account
entreat you, that instead of burning those papers you allow me to
carry away some of them." And without waiting for the shepherd's
answer, he stretched out his hand and took up some of those that were
nearest to him; seeing which Ambrosio said, "Out of courtesy, senor, I
will grant your request as to those you have taken, but it is idle to
expect me to abstain from burning the remainder." Vivaldo, who was
eager to see what the papers contained, opened one of them at once,
and saw that its title was "Lay of Despair." Ambrosio hearing it said,
"That is the last paper the unhappy man wrote; and that you may see,
senor, to what an end his misfortunes brought him, read it so that you
may be heard, for you will have time enough for that while we are
waiting for the grave to be dug." "I will do so very willingly," said
Vivaldo; and as all the bystanders were equally eager they gathered
round him, and he, reading in a loud voice, found that it ran as
follows. CHAPTER XIV. WHEREIN ARE INSERTED THE DESPAIRING VERSES OF
THE DEAD SHEPHERD, TOGETHER WITH OTHER INCIDENTS NOT LOOKED FOR THE
LAY OF CHRYSOSTOM Since thou dost in thy cruelty desire The ruthless
rigour of thy tyranny From tongue to tongue, from land to land
proclaimed, The very Hell will I constrain to lend This stricken
breast of mine deep notes of woe To serve my need of fitting
utterance. And as I strive to body forth the tale Of all I suffer, all
that thou hast done, Forth shall the dread voice roll, and bear along
Shreds from my vitals torn for greater pain. Then listen, not to
dulcet harmony, But to a discord wrung by mad despair Out of this
bosom's depths of bitterness, To ease my heart and plant a sting in
thine. The lion's roar, the fierce wolf's savage howl, The horrid
hissing of the scaly snake, The awesome cries of monsters yet unnamed,
The crow's ill-boding croak, the hollow moan Of wild winds wrestling
with the restless sea, The wrathful bellow of the vanquished bull, The
plaintive sobbing of the widowed dove, The envied owl's sad note, the
wail of woe That rises from the dreary choir of Hell, Commingled in
one sound, confusing sense, Let all these come to aid my soul's
complaint, For pain like mine demands new modes of song. No echoes of
that discord shall be heard Where Father Tagus rolls, or on the banks
Of olive-bordered Betis; to the rocks Or in deep caverns shall my
plaint be told, And by a lifeless tongue in living words; Or in dark
valleys or on lonely shores, Where neither foot of man nor sunbeam
falls; Or in among the poison-breathing swarms Of monsters nourished
by the sluggish Nile. For, though it be to solitudes remote The hoarse
vague echoes of my sorrows sound Thy matchless cruelty, my dismal fate
Shall carry them to all the spacious world. Disdain hath power to
kill, and patience dies Slain by suspicion, be it false or true; And
deadly is the force of jealousy; Long absence makes of life a dreary
void; No hope of happiness can give repose To him that ever fears to
be forgot; And death, inevitable, waits in hall. But I, by some
strange miracle, live on A prey to absence, jealousy, disdain; Racked
by suspicion as by certainty; Forgotten, left to feed my flame alone.
And while I suffer thus, there comes no ray Of hope to gladden me
athwart the gloom; Nor do I look for it in my despair; But rather
clinging to a cureless woe, All hope do I abjure for evermore. Can
there be hope where fear is? Were it well, When far more certain are
the grounds of fear? Ought I to shut mine eyes to jealousy, If through
a thousand heart-wounds it appears? Who would not give free access to
distrust, Seeing disdain unveiled, and--bitter change!-- All his
suspicions turned to certainties, And the fair truth transformed into
a lie? Oh, thou fierce tyrant of the realms of love, Oh, Jealousy! put
chains upon these hands, And bind me with thy strongest cord, Disdain.
But, woe is me! triumphant over all, My sufferings drown the memory of
you. And now I die, and since there is no hope Of happiness for me in
life or death, Still to my fantasy I'll fondly cling. I'll say that he
is wise who loveth well, And that the soul most free is that most
bound In thraldom to the ancient tyrant Love. I'll say that she who is
mine enemy In that fair body hath as fair a mind, And that her
coldness is but my desert, And that by virtue of the pain he sends
Love rules his kingdom with a gentle sway. Thus, self-deluding, and in
bondage sore, And wearing out the wretched shred of life To which I am
reduced by her disdain, I'll give this soul and body to the winds, All
hopeless of a crown of bliss in store. Thou whose injustice hath
supplied the cause That makes me quit the weary life I loathe, As by
this wounded bosom thou canst see How willingly thy victim I become,
Let not my death, if haply worth a tear, Cloud the clear heaven that
dwells in thy bright eyes; I would not have thee expiate in aught The
crime of having made my heart thy prey; But rather let thy laughter
gaily ring And prove my death to be thy festival. Fool that I am to
bid thee! well I know Thy glory gains by my untimely end. And now it
is the time; from Hell's abyss Come thirsting Tantalus, come Sisyphus
Heaving the cruel stone, come Tityus With vulture, and with wheel
Ixion come, And come the sisters of the ceaseless toil; And all into
this breast transfer their pains, And (if such tribute to despair be
due) Chant in their deepest tones a doleful dirge Over a corse
unworthy of a shroud. Let the three-headed guardian of the gate, And
all the monstrous progeny of hell, The doleful concert join: a lover
dead Methinks can have no fitter obsequies. Lay of despair, grieve not
when thou art gone Forth from this sorrowing heart: my misery Brings
fortune to the cause that gave thee birth; Then banish sadness even in
the tomb. The "Lay of Chrysostom" met with the approbation of the
listeners, though the reader said it did not seem to him to agree with
what he had heard of Marcela's reserve and propriety, for Chrysostom
complained in it of jealousy, suspicion, and absence, all to the
prejudice of the good name and fame of Marcela; to which Ambrosio
replied as one who knew well his friend's most secret thoughts,
"Senor, to remove that doubt I should tell you that when the unhappy
man wrote this lay he was away from Marcela, from whom he had
voluntarily separated himself, to try if absence would act with him as
it is wont; and as everything distresses and every fear haunts the
banished lover, so imaginary jealousies and suspicions, dreaded as if
they were true, tormented Chrysostom; and thus the truth of what
report declares of the virtue of Marcela remains unshaken, and with
her envy itself should not and cannot find any fault save that of
being cruel, somewhat haughty, and very scornful." "That is true,"
said Vivaldo; and as he was about to read another paper of those he
had preserved from the fire, he was stopped by a marvellous vision
(for such it seemed) that unexpectedly presented itself to their eyes;
for on the summit of the rock where they were digging the grave there
appeared the shepherdess Marcela, so beautiful that her beauty
exceeded its reputation. Those who had never till then beheld her
gazed upon her in wonder and silence, and those who were accustomed to
see her were not less amazed than those who had never seen her before.
But the instant Ambrosio saw her he addressed her, with manifest
indignation: "Art thou come, by chance, cruel basilisk of these
mountains, to see if in thy presence blood will flow from the wounds
of this wretched being thy cruelty has robbed of life; or is it to
exult over the cruel work of thy humours that thou art come; or like
another pitiless Nero to look down from that height upon the ruin of
his Rome in embers; or in thy arrogance to trample on this ill-fated
corpse, as the ungrateful daughter trampled on her father Tarquin's?
Tell us quickly for what thou art come, or what it is thou wouldst
have, for, as I know the thoughts of Chrysostom never failed to obey
thee in life, I will make all these who call themselves his friends
obey thee, though he be dead." "I come not, Ambrosia for any of the
purposes thou hast named," replied Marcela, "but to defend myself and
to prove how unreasonable are all those who blame me for their sorrow
and for Chrysostom's death; and therefore I ask all of you that are
here to give me your attention, for will not take much time or many
words to bring the truth home to persons of sense. Heaven has made me,
so you say, beautiful, and so much so that in spite of yourselves my
beauty leads you to love me; and for the love you show me you say, and
even urge, that I am bound to love you. By that natural understanding
which God has given me I know that everything beautiful attracts love,
but I cannot see how, by reason of being loved, that which is loved
for its beauty is bound to love that which loves it; besides, it may
happen that the lover of that which is beautiful may be ugly, and
ugliness being detestable, it is very absurd to say, "I love thee
because thou art beautiful, thou must love me though I be ugly." But
supposing the beauty equal on both sides, it does not follow that the
inclinations must be therefore alike, for it is not every beauty that
excites love, some but pleasing the eye without winning the affection;
and if every sort of beauty excited love and won the heart, the will
would wander vaguely to and fro unable to make choice of any; for as
there is an infinity of beautiful objects there must be an infinity of
inclinations, and true love, I have heard it said, is indivisible, and
must be voluntary and not compelled. If this be so, as I believe it to
be, why do you desire me to bend my will by force, for no other reason
but that you say you love me? Nay--tell me--had Heaven made me ugly,
as it has made me beautiful, could I with justice complain of you for
not loving me? Moreover, you must remember that the beauty I possess
was no choice of mine, for, be it what it may, Heaven of its bounty
gave it me without my asking or choosing it; and as the viper, though
it kills with it, does not deserve to be blamed for the poison it
carries, as it is a gift of nature, neither do I deserve reproach for
being beautiful; for beauty in a modest woman is like fire at a
distance or a sharp sword; the one does not burn, the other does not
cut, those who do not come too near. Honour and virtue are the
ornaments of the mind, without which the body, though it be so, has no
right to pass for beautiful; but if modesty is one of the virtues that
specially lend a grace and charm to mind and body, why should she who
is loved for her beauty part with it to gratify one who for his
pleasure alone strives with all his might and energy to rob her of it?
I was born free, and that I might live in freedom I chose the solitude
of the fields; in the trees of the mountains I find society, the clear
waters of the brooks are my mirrors, and to the trees and waters I
make known my thoughts and charms. I am a fire afar off, a sword laid
aside. Those whom I have inspired with love by letting them see me, I
have by words undeceived, and if their longings live on hope--and I
have given none to Chrysostom or to any other--it cannot justly be
said that the death of any is my doing, for it was rather his own
obstinacy than my cruelty that killed him; and if it be made a charge
against me that his wishes were honourable, and that therefore I was
bound to yield to them, I answer that when on this very spot where now
his grave is made he declared to me his purity of purpose, I told him
that mine was to live in perpetual solitude, and that the earth alone
should enjoy the fruits of my retirement and the spoils of my beauty;
and if, after this open avowal, he chose to persist against hope and
steer against the wind, what wonder is it that he should sink in the
depths of his infatuation? If I had encouraged him, I should be false;
if I had gratified him, I should have acted against my own better
resolution and purpose. He was persistent in spite of warning, he
despaired without being hated. Bethink you now if it be reasonable
that his suffering should be laid to my charge. Let him who has been
deceived complain, let him give way to despair whose encouraged hopes
have proved vain, let him flatter himself whom I shall entice, let him
boast whom I shall receive; but let not him call me cruel or homicide
to whom I make no promise, upon whom I practise no deception, whom I
neither entice nor receive. It has not been so far the will of Heaven
that I should love by fate, and to expect me to love by choice is
idle. Let this general declaration serve for each of my suitors on his
own account, and let it be understood from this time forth that if
anyone dies for me it is not of jealousy or misery he dies, for she
who loves no one can give no cause for jealousy to any, and candour is
not to be confounded with scorn. Let him who calls me wild beast and
basilisk, leave me alone as something noxious and evil; let him who
calls me ungrateful, withhold his service; who calls me wayward, seek
not my acquaintance; who calls me cruel, pursue me not; for this wild
beast, this basilisk, this ungrateful, cruel, wayward being has no
kind of desire to seek, serve, know, or follow them. If Chrysostom's
impatience and violent passion killed him, why should my modest
behaviour and circumspection be blamed? If I preserve my purity in the
society of the trees, why should he who would have me preserve it
among men, seek to rob me of it? I have, as you know, wealth of my
own, and I covet not that of others; my taste is for freedom, and I
have no relish for constraint; I neither love nor hate anyone; I do
not deceive this one or court that, or trifle with one or play with
another. The modest converse of the shepherd girls of these hamlets
and the care of my goats are my recreations; my desires are bounded by
these mountains, and if they ever wander hence it is to contemplate
the beauty of the heavens, steps by which the soul travels to its
primeval abode." With these words, and not waiting to hear a reply,
she turned and passed into the thickest part of a wood that was hard
by, leaving all who were there lost in admiration as much of her good
sense as of her beauty. Some--those wounded by the irresistible shafts
launched by her bright eyes--made as though they would follow her,
heedless of the frank declaration they had heard; seeing which, and
deeming this a fitting occasion for the exercise of his chivalry in
aid of distressed damsels, Don Quixote, laying his hand on the hilt of
his sword, exclaimed in a loud and distinct voice: "Let no one,
whatever his rank or condition, dare to follow the beautiful Marcela,
under pain of incurring my fierce indignation. She has shown by clear
and satisfactory arguments that little or no fault is to be found with
her for the death of Chrysostom, and also how far she is from yielding
to the wishes of any of her lovers, for which reason, instead of being
followed and persecuted, she should in justice be honoured and
esteemed by all the good people of the world, for she shows that she
is the only woman in it that holds to such a virtuous resolution."
Whether it was because of the threats of Don Quixote, or because
Ambrosio told them to fulfil their duty to their good friend, none of
the shepherds moved or stirred from the spot until, having finished
the grave and burned Chrysostom's papers, they laid his body in it,
not without many tears from those who stood by. They closed the grave
with a heavy stone until a slab was ready which Ambrosio said he meant
to have prepared, with an epitaph which was to be to this effect:
Beneath the stone before your eyes The body of a lover lies; In life
he was a shepherd swain, In death a victim to disdain. Ungrateful,
cruel, coy, and fair, Was she that drove him to despair, And Love hath
made her his ally For spreading wide his tyranny. They then strewed
upon the grave a profusion of flowers and branches, and all expressing
their condolence with his friend ambrosio, took their Vivaldo and his
companion did the same; and Don Quixote bade farewell to his hosts and
to the travellers, who pressed him to come with them to Seville, as
being such a convenient place for finding adventures, for they
presented themselves in every street and round every corner oftener
than anywhere else. Don Quixote thanked them for their advice and for
the disposition they showed to do him a favour, and said that for the
present he would not, and must not go to Seville until he had cleared
all these mountains of highwaymen and robbers, of whom report said
they were full. Seeing his good intention, the travellers were
unwilling to press him further, and once more bidding him farewell,
they left him and pursued their journey, in the course of which they
did not fail to discuss the story of Marcela and Chrysostom as well as
the madness of Don Quixote. He, on his part, resolved to go in quest
of the shepherdess Marcela, and make offer to her of all the service
he could render her; but things did not fall out with him as he
expected, according to what is related in the course of this veracious
history, of which the Second Part ends here. CHAPTER XV. IN WHICH IS
RELATED THE UNFORTUNATE ADVENTURE THAT DON QUIXOTE FELL IN WITH WHEN
HE FELL OUT WITH CERTAIN HEARTLESS YANGUESANS The sage Cide Hamete
Benengeli relates that as soon as Don Quixote took leave of his hosts
and all who had been present at the burial of Chrysostom, he and his
squire passed into the same wood which they had seen the shepherdess
Marcela enter, and after having wandered for more than two hours in
all directions in search of her without finding her, they came to a
halt in a glade covered with tender grass, beside which ran a pleasant
cool stream that invited and compelled them to pass there the hours of
the noontide heat, which by this time was beginning to come on
oppressively. Don Quixote and Sancho dismounted, and turning Rocinante
and the ass loose to feed on the grass that was there in abundance,
they ransacked the alforjas, and without any ceremony very peacefully
and sociably master and man made their repast on what they found in
them. Sancho had not thought it worth while to hobble Rocinante,
feeling sure, from what he knew of his staidness and freedom from
incontinence, that all the mares in the Cordova pastures would not
lead him into an impropriety. Chance, however, and the devil, who is
not always asleep, so ordained it that feeding in this valley there
was a drove of Galician ponies belonging to certain Yanguesan
carriers, whose way it is to take their midday rest with their teams
in places and spots where grass and water abound; and that where Don
Quixote chanced to be suited the Yanguesans' purpose very well. It so
happened, then, that Rocinante took a fancy to disport himself with
their ladyships the ponies, and abandoning his usual gait and
demeanour as he scented them, he, without asking leave of his master,
got up a briskish little trot and hastened to make known his wishes to
them; they, however, it seemed, preferred their pasture to him, and
received him with their heels and teeth to such effect that they soon
broke his girths and left him naked without a saddle to cover him; but
what must have been worse to him was that the carriers, seeing the
violence he was offering to their mares, came running up armed with
stakes, and so belaboured him that they brought him sorely battered to
the ground. By this time Don Quixote and Sancho, who had witnessed the
drubbing of Rocinante, came up panting, and said Don Quixote to
Sancho: "So far as I can see, friend Sancho, these are not knights but
base folk of low birth: I mention it because thou canst lawfully aid
me in taking due vengeance for the insult offered to Rocinante before
our eyes." "What the devil vengeance can we take," answered Sancho,
"if they are more than twenty, and we no more than two, or, indeed,
perhaps not more than one and a half?" "I count for a hundred,"
replied Don Quixote, and without more words he drew his sword and
attacked the Yanguesans and excited and impelled by the example of his
master, Sancho did the same; and to begin with, Don Quixote delivered
a slash at one of them that laid open the leather jerkin he wore,
together with a great portion of his shoulder. The Yanguesans, seeing
themselves assaulted by only two men while they were so many, betook
themselves to their stakes, and driving the two into the middle they
began to lay on with great zeal and energy; in fact, at the second
blow they brought Sancho to the ground, and Don Quixote fared the same
way, all his skill and high mettle availing him nothing, and fate
willed it that he should fall at the feet of Rocinante, who had not
yet risen; whereby it may be seen how furiously stakes can pound in
angry boorish hands. Then, seeing the mischief they had done, the
Yanguesans with all the haste they could loaded their team and pursued
their journey, leaving the two adventurers a sorry sight and in
sorrier mood. Sancho was the first to come to, and finding himself
close to his master he called to him in a weak and doleful voice,
"Senor Don Quixote, ah, Senor Don Quixote!" "What wouldst thou,
brother Sancho?" answered Don Quixote in the same feeble suffering
tone as Sancho. "I would like, if it were possible," answered Sancho
Panza, "your worship to give me a couple of sups of that potion of the
fiery Blas, if it be that you have any to hand there; perhaps it will
serve for broken bones as well as for wounds." "If I only had it here,
wretch that I am, what more should we want?" said Don Quixote; "but I
swear to thee, Sancho Panza, on the faith of a knight-errant, ere two
days are over, unless fortune orders otherwise, I mean to have it in
my possession, or my hand will have lost its cunning." "But in how
many does your worship think we shall have the use of our feet?"
answered Sancho Panza. "For myself I must say I cannot guess how
many," said the battered knight Don Quixote; "but I take all the blame
upon myself, for I had no business to put hand to sword against men
who where not dubbed knights like myself, and so I believe that in
punishment for having transgressed the laws of chivalry the God of
battles has permitted this chastisement to be administered to me; for
which reason, brother Sancho, it is well thou shouldst receive a hint
on the matter which I am now about to mention to thee, for it is of
much importance to the welfare of both of us. It is at when thou shalt
see rabble of this sort offering us insult thou art not to wait till I
draw sword against them, for I shall not do so at all; but do thou
draw sword and chastise them to thy heart's content, and if any
knights come to their aid and defence I will take care to defend thee
and assail them with all my might; and thou hast already seen by a
thousand signs and proofs what the might of this strong arm of mine is
equal to"--so uplifted had the poor gentleman become through the
victory over the stout Biscayan. But Sancho did not so fully approve
of his master's admonition as to let it pass without saying in reply,
"Senor, I am a man of peace, meek and quiet, and I can put up with any
affront because I have a wife and children to support and bring up; so
let it be likewise a hint to your worship, as it cannot be a mandate,
that on no account will I draw sword either against clown or against
knight, and that here before God I forgive the insults that have been
offered me, whether they have been, are, or shall be offered me by
high or low, rich or poor, noble or commoner, not excepting any rank
or condition whatsoever." To all which his master said in reply, "I
wish I had breath enough to speak somewhat easily, and that the pain I
feel on this side would abate so as to let me explain to thee, Panza,
the mistake thou makest. Come now, sinner, suppose the wind of
fortune, hitherto so adverse, should turn in our favour, filling the
sails of our desires so that safely and without impediment we put into
port in some one of those islands I have promised thee, how would it
be with thee if on winning it I made thee lord of it? Why, thou wilt
make it well-nigh impossible through not being a knight nor having any
desire to be one, nor possessing the courage nor the will to avenge
insults or defend thy lordship; for thou must know that in newly
conquered kingdoms and provinces the minds of the inhabitants are
never so quiet nor so well disposed to the new lord that there is no
fear of their making some move to change matters once more, and try,
as they say, what chance may do for them; so it is essential that the
new possessor should have good sense to enable him to govern, and
valour to attack and defend himself, whatever may befall him." "In
what has now befallen us," answered Sancho, "I'd have been well
pleased to have that good sense and that valour your worship speaks
of, but I swear on the faith of a poor man I am more fit for plasters
than for arguments. See if your worship can get up, and let us help
Rocinante, though he does not deserve it, for he was the main cause of
all this thrashing. I never thought it of Rocinante, for I took him to
be a virtuous person and as quiet as myself. After all, they say right
that it takes a long time to come to know people, and that there is
nothing sure in this life. Who would have said that, after such mighty
slashes as your worship gave that unlucky knight-errant, there was
coming, travelling post and at the very heels of them, such a great
storm of sticks as has fallen upon our shoulders?" "And yet thine,
Sancho," replied Don Quixote, "ought to be used to such squalls; but
mine, reared in soft cloth and fine linen, it is plain they must feel
more keenly the pain of this mishap, and if it were not that I
imagine--why do I say imagine?--know of a certainty that all these
annoyances are very necessary accompaniments of the calling of arms, I
would lay me down here to die of pure vexation." To this the squire
replied, "Senor, as these mishaps are what one reaps of chivalry, tell
me if they happen very often, or if they have their own fixed times
for coming to pass; because it seems to me that after two harvests we
shall be no good for the third, unless God in his infinite mercy helps
us." "Know, friend Sancho," answered Don Quixote, "that the life of
knights-errant is subject to a thousand dangers and reverses, and
neither more nor less is it within immediate possibility for
knights-errant to become kings and emperors, as experience has shown
in the case of many different knights with whose histories I am
thoroughly acquainted; and I could tell thee now, if the pain would
let me, of some who simply by might of arm have risen to the high
stations I have mentioned; and those same, both before and after,
experienced divers misfortunes and miseries; for the valiant Amadis of
Gaul found himself in the power of his mortal enemy Arcalaus the
magician, who, it is positively asserted, holding him captive, gave
him more than two hundred lashes with the reins of his horse while
tied to one of the pillars of a court; and moreover there is a certain
recondite author of no small authority who says that the Knight of
Phoebus, being caught in a certain pitfall, which opened under his
feet in a certain castle, on falling found himself bound hand and foot
in a deep pit underground, where they administered to him one of those
things they call clysters, of sand and snow-water, that well-nigh
finished him; and if he had not been succoured in that sore extremity
by a sage, a great friend of his, it would have gone very hard with
the poor knight; so I may well suffer in company with such worthy
folk, for greater were the indignities which they had to suffer than
those which we suffer. For I would have thee know, Sancho, that in
this there is no condition more hazardous than that of adventurers."
"That is true," said Sancho, "since the mere noise of the hammers of a
fulling mill can disturb and disquiet the heart of such a valiant
errant adventurer as your worship; but you may be sure I will not open
my lips henceforward to make light of anything of your worship's, but
only to honour you as my master and natural lord." "By so doing,"
replied Don Quixote, "shalt thou live long on the face of the earth;
for next to parents, masters are to be respected as though they were
parents." CHAPTER XXI. WHICH TREATS OF THE EXALTED ADVENTURE AND RICH
PRIZE OF MAMBRINO'S HELMET, TOGETHER WITH OTHER THINGS THAT HAPPENED
TO OUR INVINCIBLE KNIGHT It now began to rain a little, and Sancho was
for going into the fulling mills, but Don Quixote had taken such an
abhorrence to them on account of the late joke that he would not enter
them on any account; so turning aside to right they came upon another
road, different from that which they had taken the night before.
Shortly afterwards Don Quixote perceived a man on horseback who wore
on his head something that shone like gold, and the moment he saw him
he turned to Sancho and said: "I think, Sancho, there is no proverb
that is not true, all being maxims drawn from experience itself, the
mother of all the sciences, especially that one that says, 'Where one
door shuts, another opens.' I say so because if last night fortune
shut the door of the adventure we were looking for against us,
cheating us with the fulling mills, it now opens wide another one for
another better and more certain adventure, and if I do not contrive to
enter it, it will be my own fault, and I cannot lay it to my ignorance
of fulling mills, or the darkness of the night. I say this because, if
I mistake not, there comes towards us one who wears on his head the
helmet of Mambrino, concerning which I took the oath thou
rememberest." "Mind what you say, your worship, and still more what
you do," said Sancho, "for I don't want any more fulling mills to
finish off fulling and knocking our senses out." "The devil take thee,
man," said Don Quixote; "what has a helmet to do with fulling mills?"
"I don't know," replied Sancho, "but, faith, if I might speak as I
used, perhaps I could give such reasons that your worship would see
you were mistaken in what you say." "How can I be mistaken in what I
say, unbelieving traitor?" returned Don Quixote; "tell me, seest thou
not yonder knight coming towards us on a dappled grey steed, who has
upon his head a helmet of gold?" "What I see and make out," answered
Sancho, "is only a man on a grey ass like my own, who has something
that shines on his head." "Well, that is the helmet of Mambrino," said
Don Quixote; "stand to one side and leave me alone with him; thou
shalt see how, without saying a word, to save time, I shall bring this
adventure to an issue and possess myself of the helmet I have so
longed for." "I will take care to stand aside," said Sancho; "but God
grant, I say once more, that it may be marjoram and not fulling
mills." "I have told thee, brother, on no account to mention those
fulling mills to me again," said Don Quixote, "or I vow--and I say no
more-I'll full the soul out of you." Sancho held his peace in dread
lest his master should carry out the vow he had hurled like a bowl at
him. The fact of the matter as regards the helmet, steed, and knight
that Don Quixote saw, was this. In that neighbourhood there were two
villages, one of them so small that it had neither apothecary's shop
nor barber, which the other that was close to it had, so the barber of
the larger served the smaller, and in it there was a sick man who
required to be bled and another man who wanted to be shaved, and on
this errand the barber was going, carrying with him a brass basin; but
as luck would have it, as he was on the way it began to rain, and not
to spoil his hat, which probably was a new one, he put the basin on
his head, and being clean it glittered at half a league's distance. He
rode upon a grey ass, as Sancho said, and this was what made it seem
to Don Quixote to be a dapple-grey steed and a knight and a golden
helmet; for everything he saw he made to fall in with his crazy
chivalry and ill-errant notions; and when he saw the poor knight draw
near, without entering into any parley with him, at Rocinante's top
speed he bore down upon him with the pike pointed low, fully
determined to run him through and through, and as he reached him,
without checking the fury of his charge, he cried to him: "Defend
thyself, miserable being, or yield me of thine own accord that which
is so reasonably my due." The barber, who without any expectation or
apprehension of it saw this apparition coming down upon him, had no
other way of saving himself from the stroke of the lance but to let
himself fall off his ass; and no sooner had he touched the ground than
he sprang up more nimbly than a deer and sped away across the plain
faster than the wind. He left the basin on the ground, with which Don
Quixote contented himself, saying that the pagan had shown his
discretion and imitated the beaver, which finding itself pressed by
the hunters bites and cuts off with its teeth that for which, by its
natural instinct, it knows it is pursued. He told Sancho to pick up
the helmet, and he taking it in his hands said: "By God the basin is a
good one, and worth a real of eight if it is worth a maravedis," and
handed it to his master, who immediately put it on his head, turning
it round, now this way, now that, in search of fitment, and not
finding it he said, "Clearly the pagan to whose measure this famous
head-piece was first forged must have had a very large head; but the
worst of it is half of it is wanting." When Sancho heard him call the
basin a headpiece he was unable to restrain his laughter, but
remembering his master's wrath he checked himself in the midst of it.
"What art thou laughing at, Sancho?" said Don Quixote. "I am
laughing," said he, "to think of the great head the pagan must have
had who owned this helmet, for it looks exactly like a regular
barber's basin." "Dost thou know what I suspect, Sancho?" said Don
Quixote; "that this wonderful piece of this enchanted helmet must by
some strange accident have come into the hands of some one who was
unable to recognise or realise its value, and who, not knowing what he
did, and seeing it to be of the purest gold, must have melted down one
half for the sake of what it might be worth, and of the other made
this which is like a barber's basin as thou sayest; but be it as it
may, to me who recognise it, its transformation makes no difference,
for I will set it to rights at the first village where there is a
curate; if not, here is our licentiate who will do the business
beautifully; remember, I am old enough to give advice, and this I am
giving comes pat to the purpose; for a sparrow in the hand is better
than a vulture on the wing.'" "At the same time, Sancho," replied Don
Quixote, "if thou hadst let me attack them as I wanted, at the very
least the emperor's gold crown and Cupid's painted wings would have
fallen to thee as spoils, for I should have taken them by force and
given them into thy hands." "The sceptres and crowns of those
play-actor emperors," said Sancho, "were never yet pure gold, but only
brass foil or tin." "That is true," said Don Quixote, "for it would
not be right that the accessories of the drama should be real, instead
of being mere fictions and semblances, like the drama itself; towards
which, Sancho-and, as a necessary consequence, towards those who
represent and produce it--I would that thou wert favourably disposed,
for they are all instruments of great good to the State, placing
before us at every step a mirror in which we may see vividly displayed
what goes on in human life; nor is there any similitude that shows us
more faithfully what we are and ought to be than the play and the
players. Come, tell me, hast thou not seen a play acted in which
kings, emperors, pontiffs, knights, ladies, and divers other
personages were introduced? One plays the villain, another the knave,
this one the merchant, that the soldier, one the sharp-witted fool,
another the foolish lover; and when the play is over, and they have
put off the dresses they wore in it, all the actors become equal."
"Yes, I have seen that," said Sancho. "Well then," said Don Quixote,
"the same thing happens in the comedy and life of this world, where
some play emperors, others popes, and, in short, all the characters
that can be brought into a play; but when it is over, that is to say
when life ends, death strips them all of the garments that distinguish
one from the other, and all are equal in the grave." "A fine
comparison!" said Sancho; "though not so new but that I have heard it
many and many a time, as well as that other one of the game of chess;
how, so long as the game lasts, each piece has its own particular
office, and when the game is finished they are all mixed, jumbled up
and shaken together, and stowed away in the bag, which is much like
ending life in the grave." "Thou art growing less doltish and more
shrewd every day, Sancho," said Don Quixote. "Ay," said Sancho; "it
must be that some of your worship's shrewdness sticks to me; land
that, of itself, is barren and dry, will come to yield good fruit if
you dung it and till it; what I mean is that your worship's
conversation has been the dung that has fallen on the barren soil of
my dry wit, and the time I have been in your service and society has
been the tillage; and with the help of this I hope to yield fruit in
abundance that will not fall away or slide from those paths of good
breeding that your worship has made in my parched understanding." Don
Quixote laughed at Sancho's affected phraseology, and perceived that
what he said about his improvement was true, for now and then he spoke
in a way that surprised him; though always, or mostly, when Sancho
tried to talk fine and attempted polite language, he wound up by
toppling over from the summit of his simplicity into the abyss of his
ignorance; and where he showed his culture and his memory to the
greatest advantage was in dragging in proverbs, no matter whether they
had any bearing or not upon the subject in hand, as may have been seen
already and will be noticed in the course of this history. In
conversation of this kind they passed a good part of the night, but
Sancho felt a desire to let down the curtains of his eyes, as he used
to say when he wanted to go to sleep; and stripping Dapple he left him
at liberty to graze his fill. He did not remove Rocinante's saddle, as
his master's express orders were, that so long as they were in the
field or not sleeping under a roof Rocinante was not to be
stripped--the ancient usage established and observed by knights-errant
being to take off the bridle and hang it on the saddle-bow, but to
remove the saddle from the horse--never! Sancho acted accordingly, and
gave him the same liberty he had given Dapple, between whom and
Rocinante there was a friendship so unequalled and so strong, that it
is handed down by tradition from father to son, that the author of
this veracious history devoted some special chapters to it, which, in
order to preserve the propriety and decorum due to a history so
heroic, he did not insert therein; although at times he forgets this
resolution of his and describes how eagerly the two beasts would
scratch one another when they were together and how, when they were
tired or full, Rocinante would lay his neck across Dapple's,
stretching half a yard or more on the other side, and the pair would
stand thus, gazing thoughtfully on the ground, for three days, or at
least so long as they were left alone, or hunger did not drive them to
go and look for food. I may add that they say the author left it on
record that he likened their friendship to that of Nisus and Euryalus,
and Pylades and Orestes; and if that be so, it may be perceived, to
the admiration of mankind, how firm the friendship must have been
between these two peaceful animals, shaming men, who preserve
friendships with one another so badly. This was why it was said-- For
friend no longer is there friend; The reeds turn lances now. And some
one else has sung-- Friend to friend the bug, etc. And let no one
fancy that the author was at all astray when he compared the
friendship of these animals to that of men; for men have received many
lessons from beasts, and learned many important things, as, for
example, the clyster from the stork, vomit and gratitude from the dog,
watchfulness from the crane, foresight from the ant, modesty from the
elephant, and loyalty from the horse. Sancho at last fell asleep at
the foot of a cork tree, while Don Quixote dozed at that of a sturdy
oak; but a short time only had elapsed when a noise he heard behind
him awoke him, and rising up startled, he listened and looked in the
direction the noise came from, and perceived two men on horseback, one
of whom, letting himself drop from the saddle, said to the other,
"Dismount, my friend, and take the bridles off the horses, for, so far
as I can see, this place will furnish grass for them, and the solitude
and silence my love-sick thoughts need of." As he said this he
stretched himself upon the ground, and as he flung himself down, the
armour in which he was clad rattled, whereby Don Quixote perceived
that he must be a knight-errant; and going over to Sancho, who was
asleep, he shook him by the arm and with no small difficulty brought
him back to his senses, and said in a low voice to him, "Brother
Sancho, we have got an adventure." "God send us a good one," said
Sancho; "and where may her ladyship the adventure be?" "Where,
Sancho?" replied Don Quixote; "turn thine eyes and look, and thou wilt
see stretched there a knight-errant, who, it strikes me, is not over
and above happy, for I saw him fling himself off his horse and throw
himself on the ground with a certain air of dejection, and his armour
rattled as he fell." "Well," said Sancho, "how does your worship make
out that to be an adventure?" "I do not mean to say," returned Don
Quixote, "that it is a complete adventure, but that it is the
beginning of one, for it is in this way adventures begin. But listen,
for it seems he is tuning a lute or guitar, and from the way he is
spitting and clearing his chest he must be getting ready to sing
something." "Faith, you are right," said Sancho, "and no doubt he is
some enamoured knight." "There is no knight-errant that is not," said
Don Quixote; "but let us listen to him, for, if he sings, by that
thread we shall extract the ball of his thoughts; because out of the
abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh." Sancho was about to reply
to his master, but the Knight of the Grove's voice, which was neither
very bad nor very good, stopped him, and listening attentively the
pair heard him sing this SONNET Your pleasure, prithee, lady mine,
unfold; Declare the terms that I am to obey; My will to yours
submissively I mould, And from your law my feet shall never stray.
Would you I die, to silent grief a prey? Then count me even now as
dead and cold; Would you I tell my woes in some new way? Then shall my
tale by Love itself be told. The unison of opposites to prove, Of the
soft wax and diamond hard am I; But still, obedient to the laws of
love, Here, hard or soft, I offer you my breast, Whate'er you grave or
stamp thereon shall rest Indelible for all eternity. With an "Ah me!"
that seemed to be drawn from the inmost recesses of his heart, the
Knight of the Grove brought his lay to an end, and shortly afterwards
exclaimed in a melancholy and piteous voice, "O fairest and most
ungrateful woman on earth! What! can it be, most serene Casildea de
Vandalia, that thou wilt suffer this thy captive knight to waste away
and perish in ceaseless wanderings and rude and arduous toils? It is
not enough that I have compelled all the knights of Navarre, all the
Leonese, all the Tartesians, all the Castilians, and finally all the
knights of La Mancha, to confess thee the most beautiful in the
world?" "Not so," said Don Quixote at this, "for I hate all flattery;
and though this may not be so, still language of the kind is offensive
to my chaste ears. I will only say, senora, that whether it has might
or not, that which it may or may not have shall be devoted to your
service even to death; and now, leaving this to its proper season, I
would ask the senor licentiate to tell me what it is that has brought
him into these parts, alone, unattended, and so lightly clad that I am
filled with amazement." "I will answer that briefly," replied the
curate; "you must know then, Senor Don Quixote, that Master Nicholas,
our friend and barber, and I were going to Seville to receive some
money that a relative of mine who went to the Indies many years ago
had sent me, and not such a small sum but that it was over sixty
thousand pieces of eight, full weight, which is something; and passing
by this place yesterday we were attacked by four footpads, who
stripped us even to our beards, and them they stripped off so that the
barber found it necessary to put on a false one, and even this young
man here"-pointing to Cardenio--"they completely transformed. But the
best of it is, the story goes in the neighbourhood that those who
attacked us belong to a number of galley slaves who, they say, were
set free almost on the very same spot by a man of such valour that, in
spite of the commissary and of the guards, he released the whole of
them; and beyond all doubt he must have been out of his senses, or he
must be as great a scoundrel as they, or some man without heart or
conscience to let the wolf loose among the sheep, the fox among the
hens, the fly among the honey. He has defrauded justice, and opposed
his king and lawful master, for he opposed his just commands; he has,
I say, robbed the galleys of their feet, stirred up the Holy
Brotherhood which for many years past has been quiet, and, lastly, has
done a deed by which his soul may be lost without any gain to his
body." Sancho had told the curate and the barber of the adventure of
the galley slaves, which, so much to his glory, his master had
achieved, and hence the curate in alluding to it made the most of it
to see what would be said or done by Don Quixote; who changed colour
at every word, not daring to say that it was he who had been the
liberator of those worthy people. "These, then," said the curate,
"were they who robbed us; and God in his mercy pardon him who would
not let them go to the punishment they deserved." CHAPTER XXX. WHICH
TREATS OF ADDRESS DISPLAYED BY THE FAIR DOROTHEA, WITH OTHER MATTERS
PLEASANT AND AMUSING The curate had hardly ceased speaking, when
Sancho said, "In faith, then, senor licentiate, he who did that deed
was my master; and it was not for want of my telling him beforehand
and warning him to mind what he was about, and that it was a sin to
set them at liberty, as they were all on the march there because they
were special scoundrels." "Blockhead!" said Don Quixote at this, "it
is no business or concern of knights-errant to inquire whether any
persons in affliction, in chains, or oppressed that they may meet on
the high roads go that way and suffer as they do because of their
faults or because of their misfortunes. It only concerns them to aid
them as persons in need of help, having regard to their sufferings and
not to their rascalities. I encountered a chaplet or string of
miserable and unfortunate people, and did for them what my sense of
duty demands of me, and as for the rest be that as it may; and whoever
takes objection to it, saving the sacred dignity of the senor
licentiate and his honoured person, I say he knows little about
chivalry and lies like a whoreson villain, and this I will give him to
know to the fullest extent with my sword;" and so saying he settled
himself in his stirrups and pressed down his morion; for the barber's
basin, which according to him was Mambrino's helmet, he carried
hanging at the saddle-bow until he could repair the damage done to it
by the galley slaves. Dorothea, who was shrewd and sprightly, and by
this time thoroughly understood Don Quixote's crazy turn, and that all
except Sancho Panza were making game of him, not to be behind the rest
said to him, on observing his irritation, "Sir Knight, remember the
boon you have promised me, and that in accordance with it you must not
engage in any other adventure, be it ever so pressing; calm yourself,
for if the licentiate had known that the galley slaves had been set
free by that unconquered arm he would have stopped his mouth thrice
over, or even bitten his tongue three times before he would have said
a word that tended towards disrespect of your worship." "That I swear
heartily," said the curate, "and I would have even plucked off a
moustache." "I will hold my peace, senora," said Don Quixote, "and I
will curb the natural anger that had arisen in my breast, and will
proceed in peace and quietness until I have fulfilled my promise; but
in return for this consideration I entreat you to tell me, if you have
no objection to do so, what is the nature of your trouble, and how
many, who, and what are the persons of whom I am to require due
satisfaction, and on whom I am to take vengeance on your behalf?"
"That I will do with all my heart," replied Dorothea, "if it will not
be wearisome to you to hear of miseries and misfortunes." "It will not
be wearisome, senora," said Don Quixote; to which Dorothea replied,
"Well, if that be so, give me your attention." As soon as she said
this, Cardenio and the barber drew close to her side, eager to hear
what sort of story the quick-witted Dorothea would invent for herself;
and Sancho did the same, for he was as much taken in by her as his
master; and she having settled herself comfortably in the saddle, and
with the help of coughing and other preliminaries taken time to think,
began with great sprightliness of manner in this fashion. "First of
all, I would have you know, sirs, that my name is-" and here she
stopped for a moment, for she forgot the name the curate had given
her; but he came to her relief, seeing what her difficulty was, and
said, "It is no wonder, senora, that your highness should be confused
and embarrassed in telling the tale of your misfortunes; for such
afflictions often have the effect of depriving the sufferers of
memory, so that they do not even remember their own names, as is the
case now with your ladyship, who has forgotten that she is called the
Princess Micomicona, lawful heiress of the great kingdom of Micomicon;
and with this cue your highness may now recall to your sorrowful
recollection all you may wish to tell us." "That is the truth," said
the damsel; "but I think from this on I shall have no need of any
prompting, and I shall bring my true story safe into port, and here it
is. The king my father, who was called Tinacrio the Sapient, was very
learned in what they call magic arts, and became aware by his craft
that my mother, who was called Queen Jaramilla, was to die before he
did, and that soon after he too was to depart this life, and I was to
be left an orphan without father or mother. But all this, he declared,
did not so much grieve or distress him as his certain knowledge that a
prodigious giant, the lord of a great island close to our kingdom,
Pandafilando of the Scowl by name--for it is averred that, though his
eyes are properly placed and straight, he always looks askew as if he
squinted, and this he does out of malignity, to strike fear and terror
into those he looks at--that he knew, I say, that this giant on
becoming aware of my orphan condition would overrun my kingdom with a
mighty force and strip me of all, not leaving me even a small village
to shelter me; but that I could avoid all this ruin and misfortune if
I were willing to marry him; however, as far as he could see, he never
expected that I would consent to a marriage so unequal; and he said no
more than the truth in this, for it has never entered my mind to marry
that giant, or any other, let him be ever so great or enormous. My
father said, too, that when he was dead, and I saw Pandafilando about
to invade my kingdom, I was not to wait and attempt to defend myself,
for that would be destructive to me, but that I should leave the
kingdom entirely open to him if I wished to avoid the death and total
destruction of my good and loyal vassals, for there would be no
possibility of defending myself against the giant's devilish power;
and that I should at once with some of my followers set out for Spain,
where I should obtain relief in my distress on finding a certain
knight-errant whose fame by that time would extend over the whole
kingdom, and who would be called, if I remember rightly, Don Azote or
Don Gigote." "'Don Quixote,' he must have said, senora," observed
Sancho at this, "otherwise called the Knight of the Rueful
Countenance." "That is it," said Dorothea; "he said, moreover, that he
would be tall of stature and lank featured; and that on his right side
under the left shoulder, or thereabouts, he would have a grey mole
with hairs like bristles." On hearing this, Don Quixote said to his
squire, "Here, Sancho my son, bear a hand and help me to strip, for I
want to see if I am the knight that sage king foretold." "What does
your worship want to strip for?" said Dorothea. "To see if I have that
mole your father spoke of," answered Don Quixote. "There is no
occasion to strip," said Sancho; "for I know your worship has just
such a mole on the middle of your backbone, which is the mark of a
strong man." "That is enough," said Dorothea, "for with friends we
must not look too closely into trifles; and whether it be on the
shoulder or on the backbone matters little; it is enough if there is a
mole, be it where it may, for it is all the same flesh; no doubt my
good father hit the truth in every particular, and I have made a lucky
hit in commending myself to Don Quixote; for he is the one my father
spoke of, as the features of his countenance correspond with those
assigned to this knight by that wide fame he has acquired not only in
Spain but in all La Mancha; for I had scarcely landed at Osuna when I
heard such accounts of his achievements, that at once my heart told me
he was the very one I had come in search of." "But how did you land at
Osuna, senora," asked Don Quixote, "when it is not a seaport?" But
before Dorothea could reply the curate anticipated her, saying, "The
princess meant to say that after she had landed at Malaga the first
place where she heard of your worship was Osuna." "That is what I
meant to say," said Dorothea. "And that would be only natural," said
the curate. "Will your majesty please proceed?" "There is no more to
add," said Dorothea, "save that in finding Don Quixote I have had such
good fortune, that I already reckon and regard myself queen and
mistress of my entire dominions, since of his courtesy and magnanimity
he has granted me the boon of accompanying me whithersoever I may
conduct him, which will be only to bring him face to face with
Pandafilando of the Scowl, that he may slay him and restore to me what
has been unjustly usurped by him: for all this must come to pass
satisfactorily since my good father Tinacrio the Sapient foretold it,
who likewise left it declared in writing in Chaldee or Greek
characters (for I cannot read them), that if this predicted knight,
after having cut the giant's throat, should be disposed to marry me I
was to offer myself at once without demur as his lawful wife, and
yield him possession of my kingdom together with my person." "What
thinkest thou now, friend Sancho?" said Don Quixote at this. "Hearest
thou that? Did I not tell thee so? See how we have already got a
kingdom to govern and a queen to marry!" "On my oath it is so," said
Sancho; "and foul fortune to him who won't marry after slitting Senor
Pandahilado's windpipe! And then, how ill-favoured the queen is! I
wish the fleas in my bed were that sort!" And so saying he cut a
couple of capers in the air with every sign of extreme satisfaction,
and then ran to seize the bridle of Dorothea's mule, and checking it
fell on his knees before her, begging her to give him her hand to kiss
in token of his acknowledgment of her as his queen and mistress. Which
of the bystanders could have helped laughing to see the madness of the
master and the simplicity of the servant? Dorothea therefore gave her
hand, and promised to make him a great lord in her kingdom, when
Heaven should be so good as to permit her to recover and enjoy it, for
which Sancho returned thanks in words that set them all laughing
again. "This, sirs," continued Dorothea, "is my story; it only remains
to tell you that of all the attendants I took with me from my kingdom
I have none left except this well-bearded squire, for all were drowned
in a great tempest we encountered when in sight of port; and he and I
came to land on a couple of planks as if by a miracle; and indeed the
whole course of my life is a miracle and a mystery as you may have
observed; and if I have been over minute in any respect or not as
precise as I ought, let it be accounted for by what the licentiate
said at the beginning of my tale, that constant and excessive troubles
deprive the sufferers of their memory." "They shall not deprive me of
mine, exalted and worthy princess," said Don Quixote, "however great
and unexampled those which I shall endure in your service may be; and
here I confirm anew the boon I have promised you, and I swear to go
with you to the end of the world until I find myself in the presence
of your fierce enemy, whose haughty head I trust by the aid of my arm
to cut off with the edge of this--I will not say good sword, thanks to
Gines de Pasamonte who carried away mine"--(this he said between his
teeth, and then continued), "and when it has been cut off and you have
been put in peaceful possession of your realm it shall be left to your
own decision to dispose of your person as may be most pleasing to you;
for so long as my memory is occupied, my will enslaved, and my
understanding enthralled by her-I say no more--it is impossible for me
for a moment to contemplate marriage, even with a Phoenix." The last
words of his master about not wanting to marry were so disagreeable to
Sancho that raising his voice he exclaimed with great irritation: "By
my oath, Senor Don Quixote, you are not in your right senses; for how
can your worship possibly object to marrying such an exalted princess
as this? Do you think Fortune will offer you behind every stone such a
piece of luck as is offered you now? Is my lady Dulcinea fairer,
perchance? Not she; nor half as fair; and I will even go so far as to
say she does not come up to the shoe of this one here. A poor chance I
have of getting that county I am waiting for if your worship goes
looking for dainties in the bottom of the sea. I will bet my arm that
Camacho could bury Basilio in reals; and if that be so, as no doubt it
is, what a fool Quiteria would be to refuse the fine dresses and
jewels Camacho must have given her and will give her, and take
Basilio's bar-throwing and sword-play. They won't give a pint of wine
at the tavern for a good cast of the bar or a neat thrust of the
sword. Talents and accomplishments that can't be turned into money,
let Count Dirlos have them; but when such gifts fall to one that has
hard cash, I wish my condition of life was as becoming as they are. On
a good foundation you can raise a good building, and the best
foundation in the world is money." "For God's sake, Sancho," said Don
Quixote here, "stop that harangue; it is my belief, if thou wert
allowed to continue all thou beginnest every instant, thou wouldst
have no time left for eating or sleeping; for thou wouldst spend it
all in talking." "If your worship had a good memory," replied Sancho,
"you would remember the articles of our agreement before we started
from home this last time; one of them was that I was to be let say all
I liked, so long as it was not against my neighbour or your worship's
authority; and so far, it seems to me, I have not broken the said
article." "I remember no such article, Sancho," said Don Quixote; "and
even if it were so, I desire you to hold your tongue and come along;
for the instruments we heard last night are already beginning to
enliven the valleys again, and no doubt the marriage will take place
in the cool of the morning, and not in the heat of the afternoon."
Sancho did as his master bade him, and putting the saddle on Rocinante
and the pack-saddle on Dapple, they both mounted and at a leisurely
pace entered the arcade. The first thing that presented itself to
Sancho's eyes was a whole ox spitted on a whole elm tree, and in the
fire at which it was to be roasted there was burning a middling-sized
mountain of faggots, and six stewpots that stood round the blaze had
not been made in the ordinary mould of common pots, for they were six
half wine-jars, each fit to hold the contents of a slaughter-house;
they swallowed up whole sheep and hid them away in their insides
without showing any more sign of them than if they were pigeons.
Countless were the hares ready skinned and the plucked fowls that hung
on the trees for burial in the pots, numberless the wildfowl and game
of various sorts suspended from the branches that the air might keep
them cool. Sancho counted more than sixty wine skins of over six
gallons each, and all filled, as it proved afterwards, with generous
wines. There were, besides, piles of the whitest bread, like the heaps
of corn one sees on the threshing-floors. There was a wall made of
cheeses arranged like open brick-work, and two cauldrons full of oil,
bigger than those of a dyer's shop, served for cooking fritters, which
when fried were taken out with two mighty shovels, and plunged into
another cauldron of prepared honey that stood close by. Of cooks and
cook-maids there were over fifty, all clean, brisk, and blithe. In the
capacious belly of the ox were a dozen soft little sucking-pigs,
which, sewn up there, served to give it tenderness and flavour. The
spices of different kinds did not seem to have been bought by the
pound but by the quarter, and all lay open to view in a great chest.
In short, all the preparations made for the wedding were in rustic
style, but abundant enough to feed an army. Sancho observed all,
contemplated all, and everything won his heart. The first to captivate
and take his fancy were the pots, out of which he would have very
gladly helped himself to a moderate pipkinful; then the wine skins
secured his affections; and lastly, the produce of the frying-pans,
if, indeed, such imposing cauldrons may be called frying-pans; and
unable to control himself or bear it any longer, he approached one of
the busy cooks and civilly but hungrily begged permission to soak a
scrap of bread in one of the pots; to which the cook made answer,
"Brother, this is not a day on which hunger is to have any sway,
thanks to the rich Camacho; get down and look about for a ladle and
skim off a hen or two, and much good may they do you." "I don't see
one," said Sancho. "Wait a bit," said the cook; "sinner that I am! how
particular and bashful you are!" and so saying, he seized a bucket and
plunging it into one of the half jars took up three hens and a couple
of geese, and said to Sancho, "Fall to, friend, and take the edge off
your appetite with these skimmings until dinner-time comes." "I have
nothing to put them in," said Sancho. "Well then," said the cook,
"take spoon and all; for Camacho's wealth and happiness furnish
everything." While Sancho fared thus, Don Quixote was watching the
entrance, at one end of the arcade, of some twelve peasants, all in
holiday and gala dress, mounted on twelve beautiful mares with rich
handsome field trappings and a number of little bells attached to
their petrals, who, marshalled in regular order, ran not one but
several courses over the meadow, with jubilant shouts and cries of
"Long live Camacho and Quiteria! he as rich as she is fair; and she
the fairest on earth!" Hearing this, Don Quixote said to himself, "It
is easy to see these folk have never seen my Dulcinea del Toboso; for
if they had they would be more moderate in their praises of this
Quiteria of theirs." Shortly after this, several bands of dancers of
various sorts began to enter the arcade at different points, and among
them one of sword-dancers composed of some four-and-twenty lads of
gallant and high-spirited mien, clad in the finest and whitest of
linen, and with handkerchiefs embroidered in various colours with fine
silk; and one of those on the mares asked an active youth who led them
if any of the dancers had been wounded. "As yet, thank God, no one has
been wounded," said he, "we are all safe and sound;" and he at once
began to execute complicated figures with the rest of his comrades,
with so many turns and so great dexterity, that although Don Quixote
was well used to see dances of the same kind, he thought he had never
seen any so good as this. He also admired another that came in
composed of fair young maidens, none of whom seemed to be under
fourteen or over eighteen years of age, all clad in green stuff, with
their locks partly braided, partly flowing loose, but all of such
bright gold as to vie with the sunbeams, and over them they wore
garlands of jessamine, roses, amaranth, and honeysuckle. At their head
were a venerable old man and an ancient dame, more brisk and active,
however, than might have been expected from their years. The notes of
a Zamora bagpipe accompanied them, and with modesty in their
countenances and in their eyes, and lightness in their feet, they
looked the best dancers in the world. Following these there came an
artistic dance of the sort they call "speaking dances." It was
composed of eight nymphs in two files, with the god Cupid leading one
and Interest the other, the former furnished with wings, bow, quiver
and arrows, the latter in a rich dress of gold and silk of divers
colours. The nymphs that followed Love bore their names written on
white parchment in large letters on their backs. "Poetry" was the name
of the first, "Wit" of the second, "Birth" of the third, and "Valour"
of the fourth. Those that followed Interest were distinguished in the
same way; the badge of the first announced "Liberality," that of the
second "Largess," the third "Treasure," and the fourth "Peaceful
Possession." In front of them all came a wooden castle drawn by four
wild men, all clad in ivy and hemp stained green, and looking so
natural that they nearly terrified Sancho. On the front of the castle
and on each of the four sides of its frame it bore the inscription
"Castle of Caution." Four skillful tabor and flute players accompanied
them, and the dance having been opened, Cupid, after executing two
figures, raised his eyes and bent his bow against a damsel who stood
between the turrets of the castle, and thus addressed her: I am the
mighty God whose sway Is potent over land and sea. The heavens above
us own me; nay, The shades below acknowledge me. I know not fear, I
have my will, Whate'er my whim or fancy be; For me there's no
impossible, I order, bind, forbid, set free. Having concluded the
stanza he discharged an arrow at the top of the castle, and went back
to his place. Interest then came forward and went through two more
figures, and as soon as the tabors ceased, he said: But mightier than
Love am I, Though Love it be that leads me on, Than mine no lineage is
more high, Or older, underneath the sun. To use me rightly few know
how, To act without me fewer still, For I am Interest, and I vow For
evermore to do thy will. Interest retired, and Poetry came forward,
and when she had gone through her figures like the others, fixing her
eyes on the damsel of the castle, she said: With many a fanciful
conceit, Fair Lady, winsome Poesy Her soul, an offering at thy feet,
Presents in sonnets unto thee. If thou my homage wilt not scorn, Thy
fortune, watched by envious eyes, On wings of poesy upborne Shall be
exalted to the skies. Poetry withdrew, and on the side of Interest
Liberality advanced, and after having gone through her figures, said:
To give, while shunning each extreme, The sparing hand, the over-free,
Therein consists, so wise men deem, The virtue Liberality. But thee,
fair lady, to enrich, Myself a prodigal I'll prove, A vice not wholly
shameful, which May find its fair excuse in love. In the same manner
all the characters of the two bands advanced and retired, and each
executed its figures, and delivered its verses, some of them graceful,
some burlesque, but Don Quixote's memory (though he had an excellent
one) only carried away those that have been just quoted. All then
mingled together, forming chains and breaking off again with graceful,
unconstrained gaiety; and whenever Love passed in front of the castle
he shot his arrows up at it, while Interest broke gilded pellets
against it. At length, after they had danced a good while, Interest
drew out a great purse, made of the skin of a large brindled cat and
to all appearance full of money, and flung it at the castle, and with
the force of the blow the boards fell asunder and tumbled down,
leaving the damsel exposed and unprotected. Interest and the
characters of his band advanced, and throwing a great chain of gold
over her neck pretended to take her and lead her away captive, on
seeing which, Love and his supporters made as though they would
release her, the whole action being to the accompaniment of the tabors
and in the form of a regular dance. The wild men made peace between
them, and with great dexterity readjusted and fixed the boards of the
castle, and the damsel once more ensconced herself within; and with
this the dance wound up, to the great enjoyment of the beholders. Don
Quixote asked one of the nymphs who it was that had composed and
arranged it. She replied that it was a beneficiary of the town who had
a nice taste in devising things of the sort. "I will lay a wager,"
said Don Quixote, "that the same bachelor or beneficiary is a greater
friend of Camacho's than of Basilio's, and that he is better at satire
than at vespers; he has introduced the accomplishments of Basilio and
the riches of Camacho very neatly into the dance." Sancho Panza, who
was listening to all this, exclaimed, "The king is my cock; I stick to
Camacho." "It is easy to see thou art a clown, Sancho," said Don
Quixote, "and one of that sort that cry 'Long life to the conqueror.'"
"I don't know of what sort I am," returned Sancho, "but I know very
well I'll never get such elegant skimmings off Basilio's pots as these
I have got off Camacho's;" and he showed him the bucketful of geese
and hens, and seizing one began to eat with great gaiety and appetite,
saying, "A fig for the accomplishments of Basilio! As much as thou
hast so much art thou worth,' as my grandmother used to say; and 'thou
canst have no revenge of a man of substance.'" "Oh, God's curse upon
thee, Sancho!" here exclaimed Don Quixote; "sixty thousand devils fly
away with thee and thy proverbs! For the last hour thou hast been
stringing them together and inflicting the pangs of torture on me with
every one of them. Those proverbs will bring thee to the gallows one
day, I promise thee; thy subjects will take the government from thee,
or there will be revolts among them. Tell me, where dost thou pick
them up, thou booby? How dost thou apply them, thou blockhead? For
with me, to utter one and make it apply properly, I have to sweat and
labour as if I were digging." "By God, master mine," said Sancho,
"your worship is making a fuss about very little. Why the devil should
you be vexed if I make use of what is my own? And I have got nothing
else, nor any other stock in trade except proverbs and more proverbs;
and here are three just this instant come into my head, pat to the
purpose and like pears in a basket; but I won't repeat them, for 'sage
silence is called Sancho.'" "That, Sancho, thou art not," said Don
Quixote; "for not only art thou not sage silence, but thou art
pestilent prate and perversity; still I would like to know what three
proverbs have just now come into thy memory, for I have been turning
over mine own--and it is a good one--and none occurs to me." "What can
be better," said Sancho, "than 'never put thy thumbs between two back
teeth;' and 'to "get out of my house" and "what do you want with my
wife?" there is no answer;' and 'whether the pitcher hits the stove,
or the stove the pitcher, it's a bad business for the pitcher;' all
which fit to a hair? For no one should quarrel with his governor, or
him in authority over him, because he will come off the worst, as he
does who puts his finger between two back and if they are not back
teeth it makes no difference, so long as they are teeth; and to
whatever the governor may say there's no answer, any more than to 'get
out of my house' and 'what do you want with my wife?' and then, as for
that about the stone and the pitcher, a blind man could see that. So
that he 'who sees the mote in another's eye had need to see the beam
in his own,' that it be not said of himself, 'the dead woman was
frightened at the one with her throat cut;' and your worship knows
well that 'the fool knows more in his own house than the wise man in
another's.'" "Nay, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "the fool knows nothing,
either in his own house or in anybody else's, for no wise structure of
any sort can stand on a foundation of folly; but let us say no more
about it, Sancho, for if thou governest badly, thine will be the fault
and mine the shame; but I comfort myself with having done my duty in
advising thee as earnestly and as wisely as I could; and thus I am
released from my obligations and my promise. God guide thee, Sancho,
and govern thee in thy government, and deliver me from the misgiving I
have that thou wilt turn the whole island upside down, a thing I might
easily prevent by explaining to the duke what thou art and telling him
that all that fat little person of thine is nothing else but a sack
full of proverbs and sauciness." "Senor," said Sancho, "if your
worship thinks I'm not fit for this government, I give it up on the
spot; for the mere black of the nail of my soul is dearer to me than
my whole body; and I can live just as well, simple Sancho, on bread
and onions, as governor, on partridges and capons; and what's more,
while we're asleep we're all equal, great and small, rich and poor.
But if your worship looks into it, you will see it was your worship
alone that put me on to this business of governing; for I know no more
about the government of islands than a buzzard; and if there's any
reason to think that because of my being a governor the devil will get
hold of me, I'd rather go Sancho to heaven than governor to hell." "By
God, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "for those last words thou hast
uttered alone, I consider thou deservest to be governor of a thousand
islands. Thou hast good natural instincts, without which no knowledge
is worth anything; commend thyself to God, and try not to swerve in
the pursuit of thy main object; I mean, always make it thy aim and
fixed purpose to do right in all matters that come before thee, for
heaven always helps good intentions; and now let us go to dinner, for
I think my lord and lady are waiting for us." CHAPTER XLIV. HOW SANCHO
PANZA WAS CONDUCTED TO HIS GOVERNMENT, AND OF THE STRANGE ADVENTURE
THAT BEFELL DON QUIXOTE IN THE CASTLE It is stated, they say, in the
true original of this history, that when Cide Hamete came to write
this chapter, his interpreter did not translate it as he wrote
it--that is, as a kind of complaint the Moor made against himself for
having taken in hand a story so dry and of so little variety as this
of Don Quixote, for he found himself forced to speak perpetually of
him and Sancho, without venturing to indulge in digressions and
episodes more serious and more interesting. He said, too, that to go
on, mind, hand, pen always restricted to writing upon one single
subject, and speaking through the mouths of a few characters, was
intolerable drudgery, the result of which was never equal to the
author's labour, and that to avoid this he had in the First Part
availed himself of the device of novels, like "The Ill-advised
Curiosity," and "The Captive Captain," which stand, as it were, apart
from the story; the others are given there being incidents which
occurred to Don Quixote himself and could not be omitted. He also
thought, he says, that many, engrossed by the interest attaching to
the exploits of Don Quixote, would take none in the novels, and pass
them over hastily or impatiently without noticing the elegance and art
of their composition, which would be very manifest were they published
by themselves and not as mere adjuncts to the crazes of Don Quixote or
the simplicities of Sancho. Therefore in this Second Part he thought
it best not to insert novels, either separate or interwoven, but only
episodes, something like them, arising out of the circumstances the
facts present; and even these sparingly, and with no more words than
suffice to make them plain; and as he confines and restricts himself
to the narrow limits of the narrative, though he has ability;
capacity, and brains enough to deal with the whole universe, he
requests that his labours may not be despised, and that credit be
given him, not alone for what he writes, but for what he has refrained
from writing. And so he goes on with his story, saying that the day
Don Quixote gave the counsels to Sancho, the same afternoon after
dinner he handed them to him in writing so that he might get some one
to read them to him. They had scarcely, however, been given to him
when he let them drop, and they fell into the hands of the duke, who
showed them to the duchess and they were both amazed afresh at the
madness and wit of Don Quixote. To carry on the joke, then, the same
evening they despatched Sancho with a large following to the village
that was to serve him for an island. It happened that the person who
had him in charge was a majordomo of the duke's, a man of great
discretion and humour--and there can be no humour without
discretion--and the same who played the part of the Countess Trifaldi
in the comical way that has been already described; and thus
qualified, and instructed by his master and mistress as to how to deal
with Sancho, he carried out their scheme admirably. Now it came to
pass that as soon as Sancho saw this majordomo he seemed in his
features to recognise those of the Trifaldi, and turning to his
master, he said to him, "Senor, either the devil will carry me off,
here on this spot, righteous and believing, or your worship will own
to me that the face of this majordomo of the duke's here is the very
face of the Distressed One." Don Quixote regarded the majordomo
attentively, and having done so, said to Sancho, "There is no reason
why the devil should carry thee off, Sancho, either righteous or
believing--and what thou meanest by that I know not; the face of the
Distressed One is that of the majordomo, but for all that the
majordomo is not the Distressed One; for his being so would involve a
mighty contradiction; but this is not the time for going into
questions of the sort, which would be involving ourselves in an
inextricable labyrinth. Believe me, my friend, we must pray earnestly
to our Lord that he deliver us both from wicked wizards and
enchanters." "It is no joke, senor," said Sancho, "for before this I
heard him speak, and it seemed exactly as if the voice of the Trifaldi
was sounding in my ears. Well, I'll hold my peace; but I'll take care
to be on the look-out henceforth for any sign that may be seen to
confirm or do away with this suspicion." "Thou wilt do well, Sancho,"
said Don Quixote, "and thou wilt let me know all thou discoverest, and
all that befalls thee in thy government." Sancho at last set out
attended by a great number of people. He was dressed in the garb of a
lawyer, with a gaban of tawny watered camlet over all and a montera
cap of the same material, and mounted a la gineta upon a mule. Behind
him, in accordance with the duke's orders, followed Dapple with brand
new ass-trappings and ornaments of silk, and from time to time Sancho
turned round to look at his ass, so well pleased to have him with him
that he would not have changed places with the emperor of Germany. On
taking leave he kissed the hands of the duke and duchess and got his
master's blessing, which Don Quixote gave him with tears, and he
received blubbering. Let worthy Sancho go in peace, and good luck to
him, Gentle Reader; and look out for two bushels of laughter, which
the account of how he behaved himself in office will give thee. In the
meantime turn thy attention to what happened his master the same
night, and if thou dost not laugh thereat, at any rate thou wilt
stretch thy mouth with a grin; for Don Quixote's adventures must be
honoured either with wonder or with laughter. It is recorded, then,
that as soon as Sancho had gone, Don Quixote felt his loneliness, and
had it been possible for him to revoke the mandate and take away the
government from him he would have done so. The duchess observed his
dejection and asked him why he was melancholy; because, she said, if
it was for the loss of Sancho, there were squires, duennas, and
damsels in her house who would wait upon him to his full satisfaction.
"The truth is, senora," replied Don Quixote, "that I do feel the loss
of Sancho; but that is not the main cause of my looking sad; and of
all the offers your excellence makes me, I accept only the good-will
with which they are made, and as to the remainder I entreat of your
excellence to permit and allow me alone to wait upon myself in my
chamber." "Indeed, Senor Don Quixote," said the duchess, "that we may
always hear good news of your exploits; God speed you; for the longer
you stay, the more you inflame the hearts of the damsels who behold
you; and as for this one of mine, I will so chastise her that she will
not transgress again, either with her eyes or with her words." "One
word and no more, O valiant Don Quixote, I ask you to hear," said
Altisidora, "and that is that I beg your pardon about the theft of the
garters; for by God and upon my soul I want it badly; and if they gave
me a scrape of the razor besides I'd take it as a still greater
kindness." "What are you saying to yourself, Sancho?" asked the
duchess. "I was saying, senora," he replied, "that in the courts of
other princes, when the cloth is taken away, I have always heard say
they give water for the hands, but not lye for the beard; and that
shows it is good to live long that you may see much; to be sure, they
say too that he who lives a long life must undergo much evil, though
to undergo a washing of that sort is pleasure rather than pain."
"Don't be uneasy, friend Sancho," said the duchess; "I will take care
that my damsels wash you, and even put you in the tub if necessary."
"I'll be content with the beard," said Sancho, "at any rate for the
present; and as for the future, God has decreed what is to be."
"Attend to worthy Sancho's request, seneschal," said the duchess, "and
do exactly what he wishes." The seneschal replied that Senor Sancho
should be obeyed in everything; and with that he went away to dinner
and took Sancho along with him, while the duke and duchess and Don
Quixote remained at table discussing a great variety of things, but
all bearing on the calling of arms and knight-errantry. The duchess
begged Don Quixote, as he seemed to have a retentive memory, to
describe and portray to her the beauty and features of the lady
Dulcinea del Toboso, for, judging by what fame trumpeted abroad of her
beauty, she felt sure she must be the fairest creature in the world,
nay, in all La Mancha. Don Quixote sighed on hearing the duchess's
request, and said, "If I could pluck out my heart, and lay it on a
plate on this table here before your highness's eyes, it would spare
my tongue the pain of telling what can hardly be thought of, for in it
your excellence would see her portrayed in full. But why should I
attempt to depict and describe in detail, and feature by feature, the
beauty of the peerless Dulcinea, the burden being one worthy of other
shoulders than mine, an enterprise wherein the pencils of Parrhasius,
Timantes, and Apelles, and the graver of Lysippus ought to be
employed, to paint it in pictures and carve it in marble and bronze,
and Ciceronian and Demosthenian eloquence to sound its praises?" "What
does Demosthenian mean, Senor Don Quixote?" said the duchess; "it is a
word I never heard in all my life." "Demosthenian eloquence," said Don
Quixote, "means the eloquence of Demosthenes, as Ciceronian means that
of Cicero, who were the two most eloquent orators in the world."
"True," said the duke; "you must have lost your wits to ask such a
question. Nevertheless, Senor Don Quixote would greatly gratify us if
he would depict her to us; for never fear, even in an outline or
sketch she will be something to make the fairest envious." "I would do
so certainly," said Don Quixote, "had she not been blurred to my
mind's eye by the misfortune that fell upon her a short time since,
one of such a nature that I am more ready to weep over it than to
describe it. For your highnesses must know that, going a few days back
to kiss her hands and receive her benediction, approbation, and
permission for this third sally, I found her altogether a different
being from the one I sought; I found her enchanted and changed from a
princess into a peasant, from fair to foul, from an angel into a
devil, from fragrant to pestiferous, from refined to clownish, from a
dignified lady into a jumping tomboy, and, in a word, from Dulcinea
del Toboso into a coarse Sayago wench." "God bless me!" said the duke
aloud at this, "who can have done the world such an injury? Who can
have robbed it of the beauty that gladdened it, of the grace and
gaiety that charmed it, of the modesty that shed a lustre upon it?"
"Who?" replied Don Quixote; "who could it be but some malignant
enchanter of the many that persecute me out of envy--that accursed
race born into the world to obscure and bring to naught the
achievements of the good, and glorify and exalt the deeds of the
wicked? Enchanters have persecuted me, enchanters persecute me still,
and enchanters will continue to persecute me until they have sunk me
and my lofty chivalry in the deep abyss of oblivion; and they injure
and wound me where they know I feel it most. For to deprive a
knight-errant of his lady is to deprive him of the eyes he sees with,
of the sun that gives him light, of the food whereby he lives. Many a
time before have I said it, and I say it now once more, a
knight-errant without a lady is like a tree without leaves, a building
without a foundation, or a shadow without the body that causes it."
"There is no denying it," said the duchess; "but still, if we are to
believe the history of Don Quixote that has come out here lately with
general applause, it is to be inferred from it, if I mistake not, that
you never saw the lady Dulcinea, and that the said lady is nothing in
the world but an imaginary lady, one that you yourself begot and gave
birth to in your brain, and adorned with whatever charms and
perfections you chose." "There is a good deal to be said on this
matter of counties." To which Don Quixote returned, "I know not what
more there is to be said; I only guide myself by the example set me by
the great Amadis of Gaul, when he made his squire count of the Insula
Firme; and so, without any scruples of conscience, I can make a count
of Sancho Panza, for he is one of the best squires that ever
knight-errant had." The canon was astonished at the methodical
nonsense (if nonsense be capable of method) that Don Quixote uttered,
at the way in which he had described the adventure of the knight of
the lake, at the impression that the deliberate lies of the books he
read had made upon him, and lastly he marvelled at the simplicity of
Sancho, who desired so eagerly to obtain the county his master had
promised him. By this time the canon's servants, who had gone to the
inn to fetch the sumpter mule, had returned, and making a carpet and
the green grass of the meadow serve as a table, they seated themselves
in the shade of some trees and made their repast there, that the
carter might not be deprived of the advantage of the spot, as has been
already said. As they were eating they suddenly heard a loud noise and
the sound of a bell that seemed to come from among some brambles and
thick bushes that were close by, and the same instant they observed a
beautiful goat, spotted all over black, white, and brown, spring out
of the thicket with a goatherd after it, calling to it and uttering
the usual cries to make it stop or turn back to the fold. The fugitive
goat, scared and frightened, ran towards the company as if seeking
their protection and then stood still, and the goatherd coming up
seized it by the horns and began to talk to it as if it were possessed
of reason and understanding: "Ah wanderer, wanderer, Spotty, Spotty;
how have you gone limping all this time? What wolves have frightened
you, my daughter? Won't you tell me what is the matter, my beauty? But
what else can it be except that you are a she, and cannot keep quiet?
A plague on your humours and the humours of those you take after! Come
back, come back, my darling; and if you will not be so happy, at any
rate you will be safe in the fold or with your companions; for if you
who ought to keep and lead them, go wandering astray, what will become
of them?" The goatherd's talk amused all who heard it, but especially
the canon, who said to him, "As you live, brother, take it easy, and
be not in such a hurry to drive this goat back to the fold; for, being
a female, as you say, she will follow her natural instinct in spite of
all you can do to prevent it. Take this morsel and drink a sup, and
that will soothe your irritation, and in the meantime the goat will
rest herself," and so saying, he handed him the loins of a cold rabbit
on a fork. The goatherd took it with thanks, and drank and calmed
himself, and then said, "I should be sorry if your worships were to
take me for a simpleton for having spoken so seriously as I did to
this animal; but the truth is there is a certain mystery in the words
I used. I am a clown, but not so much of one but that I know how to
behave to men and to beasts." "That I can well believe," said the
curate, "for I know already by experience that the woods breed men of
learning, and shepherds' harbour philosophers." "At all events,
senor," returned the goatherd, "they shelter men of experience; and
that you may see the truth of this and grasp it, though I may seem to
put myself forward without being asked, I will, if it will not tire
you, gentlemen, and you will give me your attention for a little, tell
you a true story which will confirm this gentleman's word (and he
pointed to the curate) as well as my own." To this Don Quixote
replied, "Seeing that this affair has a certain colour of chivalry
about it, I for my part, brother, will hear you most gladly, and so
will all these gentlemen, from the high intelligence they possess and
their love of curious novelties that interest, charm, and entertain
the mind, as I feel quite sure your story will do. So begin, friend,
for we are all prepared to listen." "I draw my stakes," said Sancho,
"and will retreat with this pasty to the brook there, where I mean to
victual myself for three days; for I have heard my lord, Don Quixote,
say that a knight-errant's squire should eat until he can hold no
more, whenever he has the chance, because it often happens them to get
by accident into a wood so thick that they cannot find a way out of it
for six days; and if the man is not well filled or his alforjas well
stored, there he may stay, as very often he does, turned into a dried
mummy." "Thou art in the right of it, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "and
I will take thy advice as to accompanying the princess before going to
see Dulcinea; but I counsel thee not to say anything to any one, or to
those who are with us, about what we have considered and discussed,
for as Dulcinea is so decorous that she does not wish her thoughts to
be known it is not right that I or anyone for me should disclose
them." "Well then, if that be so," said Sancho, "how is it that your
worship makes all those you overcome by your arm go to present
themselves before my lady Dulcinea, this being the same thing as
signing your name to it that you love her and are her lover? And as
those who go must perforce kneel before her and say they come from
your worship to submit themselves to her, how can the thoughts of both
of you be hid?" "O, how silly and simple thou art!" said Don Quixote;
"seest thou not, Sancho, that this tends to her greater exaltation?
For thou must know that according to our way of thinking in chivalry,
it is a high honour to a lady to have many knights-errant in her
service, whose thoughts never go beyond serving her for her own sake,
and who look for no other reward for their great and true devotion
than that she should be willing to accept them as her knights." "It is
with that kind of love," said Sancho, "I have heard preachers say we
ought to love our Lord, for himself alone, without being moved by the
hope of glory or the fear of punishment; though for my part, I would
rather love and serve him for what he could do." "The devil take thee
for a clown!" said Don Quixote, "and what shrewd things thou sayest at
times! One would think thou hadst studied." "In faith, then, I cannot
even read." Master Nicholas here called out to them to wait a while,
as they wanted to halt and drink at a little spring there was there.
Don Quixote drew up, not a little to the satisfaction of Sancho, for
he was by this time weary of telling so many lies, and in dread of his
master catching him tripping, for though he knew that Dulcinea was a
peasant girl of El Toboso, he had never seen her in all his life.
Cardenio had now put on the clothes which Dorothea was wearing when
they found her, and though they were not very good, they were far
better than those he put off. They dismounted together by the side of
the spring, and with what the curate had provided himself with at the
inn they appeased, though not very well, the keen appetite they all of
them brought with them. While they were so employed there happened to
come by a youth passing on his way, who stopping to examine the party
at the spring, the next moment ran to Don Quixote and clasping him
round the legs, began to weep freely, saying, "O, senor, do you not
know me? Look at me well; I am that lad Andres that your worship
released from the oak-tree where I was tied." Don Quixote recognised
him, and taking his hand he turned to those present and said: "That
your worships may see how important it is to have knights-errant to
redress the wrongs and injuries done by tyrannical and wicked men in
this world, I may tell you that some days ago passing through a wood,
I heard cries and piteous complaints as of a person in pain and
distress; I immediately hastened, impelled by my bounden duty, to the
quarter whence the plaintive accents seemed to me to proceed, and I
found tied to an oak this lad who now stands before you, which in my
heart I rejoice at, for his testimony will not permit me to depart
from the truth in any particular. He was, I say, tied to an oak, naked
from the waist up, and a clown, whom I afterwards found to be his
master, was scarifying him by lashes with the reins of his mare. As
soon as I saw him I asked the reason of so cruel a flagellation. The
boor replied that he was flogging him because he was his servant and
because of carelessness that proceeded rather from dishonesty than
stupidity; on which this boy said, 'Senor, he flogs me only because I
ask for my wages.' The master made I know not what speeches and
explanations, which, though I listened to them, I did not accept. In
short, I compelled the clown to unbind him, and to swear he would take
him with him, and pay him real by real, and perfumed into the bargain.
Is not all this true, Andres my son? Didst thou not mark with what
authority I commanded him, and with what humility he promised to do
all I enjoined, specified, and required of him? Answer without
hesitation; tell these gentlemen what took place, that they may see
that it is as great an advantage as I say to have knights-errant
abroad." "All that your worship has said is quite true," answered the
lad; "but the end of the business turned out just the opposite of what
your worship supposes." "How! the opposite?" said Don Quixote; "did
not the clown pay thee then?" "Not only did he not pay me," replied
the lad, "but as soon as your worship had passed out of the wood and
we were alone, he tied me up again to the same oak and gave me a fresh
flogging, that left me like a flayed Saint Bartholomew; and every
stroke he gave me he followed up with some jest or gibe about having
made a fool of your worship, and but for the pain I was suffering I
should have laughed at the things he said. In short he left me in such
a condition that I have been until now in a hospital getting cured of
the injuries which that rascally clown inflicted on me then; for all
which your worship is to blame; for if you had gone your own way and
not come where there was no call for you, nor meddled in other
people's affairs, my master would have been content with giving me one
or two dozen lashes, and would have then loosed me and paid me what he
owed me; but when your worship abused him so out of measure, and gave
him so many hard words, his anger was kindled; and as he could not
revenge himself on you, as soon as he saw you had left him the storm
burst upon me in such a way, that I feel as if I should never be a man
again." "The mischief," said Don Quixote, "lay in my going away; for I
should not have gone until I had seen thee paid; because I ought to
have known well by long experience that there is no clown who will
keep his word if he finds it will not suit him to keep it; but thou
rememberest, Andres, that I swore if he did not pay thee I would go
and seek him, and find him though he were to hide himself in the
whale's belly." "That is true," said Andres; "but it was of no use."
"Thou shalt see now whether it is of use or not," said Don Quixote;
and so saying, he got up hastily and bade Sancho bridle Rocinante, who
was browsing while they were eating. Dorothea asked him what he meant
to do. He replied that he meant to go in search of this clown and
chastise him for such iniquitous conduct, and see Andres paid to the
last maravedi, despite and in the teeth of all the clowns in the
world. To which she replied that he must remember that in accordance
with his promise he could not engage in any enterprise until he had
concluded hers; and that as he knew this better than anyone, he should
restrain his ardour until his return from her kingdom. "That is true,"
said Don Quixote, "and Andres must have patience until my return as
you say, senora; but I once more swear and promise not to stop until I
have seen him avenged and paid." "I have no faith in those oaths,"
said Andres; "I would rather have now something to help me to get to
Seville than all the revenges in the world; if you have here anything
to eat that I can take with me, give it me, and God be with your
worship and all knights-errant; and may their errands turn out as well
for themselves as they have for me." Sancho took out from his store a
piece of bread and another of cheese, and giving them to the lad he
said, "Here, take this, brother Andres, for we have all of us a share
in your misfortune." "Why, what share have you got?" "This share of
bread and cheese I am giving you," answered Sancho; "and God knows
whether I shall feel the want of it myself or not; for I would have
you know, friend, that we squires to knights-errant have to bear a
great deal of hunger and hard fortune, and even other things more
easily felt than told." Andres seized his bread and cheese, and seeing
that nobody gave him anything more, bent his head, and took hold of
the road, as the saying is. However, before leaving he said, "For the
love of God, sir knight-errant, if you ever meet me again, though you
may see them cutting me to pieces, give me no aid or succour, but
leave me to my misfortune, which will not be so great but that a
greater will come to me by being helped by your worship, on whom and
all the knights-errant that have ever been born God send his curse."
Don Quixote was getting up to chastise him, but he took to his heels
at such a pace that no one attempted to follow him; and mightily
chapfallen was Don Quixote at Andres' story, and the others had to
take great care to restrain their laughter so as not to put him
entirely out of countenance. CHAPTER XXXII. WHICH TREATS OF WHAT
BEFELL DON QUIXOTE'S PARTY AT THE INN Their dainty repast being
finished, they saddled at once, and without any adventure worth
mentioning they reached next day the inn, the object of Sancho Panza's
fear and dread; but though he would have rather not entered it, there
was no help for it. The landlady, the landlord, their daughter, and
Maritornes, when they saw Don Quixote and Sancho coming, went out to
welcome them with signs of hearty satisfaction, which Don Quixote
received with dignity and gravity, and bade them make up a better bed
for him than the last time: to which the landlady replied that if he
paid better than he did the last time she would give him one fit for a
prince. Don Quixote said he would, so they made up a tolerable one for
him in the same garret as before; and he lay down at once, being
sorely shaken and in want of sleep. No sooner was the door shut upon
him than the landlady made at the barber, and seizing him by the
beard, said: "By my faith you are not going to make a beard of my tail
any longer; you must give me back tail, for it is a shame the way that
thing of my husband's goes tossing about on the floor; I mean the comb
that I used to stick in my good tail." But for all she tugged at it
the barber would not give it up until the licentiate told him to let
her have it, as there was now no further occasion for that stratagem,
because he might declare himself and appear in his own character, and
tell Don Quixote that he had fled to this inn when those thieves the
galley slaves robbed him; and should he ask for the princess's squire,
they could tell him that she had sent him on before her to give notice
to the people of her kingdom that she was coming, and bringing with
her the deliverer of them all. On this the barber cheerfully restored
the tail to the landlady, and at the same time they returned all the
accessories they had borrowed to effect Don Quixote's deliverance. All
the people of the inn were struck with astonishment at the beauty of
Dorothea, and even at the comely figure of the shepherd Cardenio. The
curate made them get ready such fare as there was in the inn, and the
landlord, in hope of better payment, served them up a tolerably good
dinner. All this time Don Quixote was asleep, and they thought it best
not to waken him, as sleeping would now do him more good than eating.
While at dinner, the company consisting of the landlord, his wife,
their daughter, Maritornes, and all the travellers, they discussed the
strange craze of Don Quixote and the manner in which he had been
found; and the landlady told them what had taken place between him and
the carrier; and then, looking round to see if Sancho was there, when
she saw he was not, she gave them the whole story of his blanketing,
which they received with no little amusement. But on the curate
observing that it was the books of chivalry which Don Quixote had read
that had turned his brain, the landlord said: "I cannot understand how
that can be, for in truth to my mind there is no better reading in the
world, and I have here two or three of them, with other writings that
are the very life, not only of myself but of plenty more; for when it
is harvest-time, the reapers flock here on holidays, and there is
always one among them who can read and who takes up one of these
books, and we gather round him, thirty or more of us, and stay
listening to him with a delight that makes our grey hairs grow young
again. At least I can say for myself that when I hear of what furious
and terrible blows the knights deliver, I am seized with the longing
to do the same, and I would like to be hearing about them night and
day." "And I just as much," said the landlady, "because I never have a
quiet moment in my house except when you are listening to some one
reading; for then you are so taken up that for the time being you
forget to scold." "That is true," said Maritornes; "and, faith, I
relish hearing these things greatly too, for they are very pretty;
especially when they describe some lady or another in the arms of her
knight under the orange trees, and the duenna who is keeping watch for
them half dead with envy and fright; all this I say is as good as
honey." "And you, what do you think, young lady?" said the curate
turning to the landlord's daughter. "I don't know indeed, senor," said
she; "I listen too, and to tell the truth, though I do not understand
it, I like hearing it; but it is not the blows that my father likes
that I like, but the laments the knights utter when they are separated
from their ladies; and indeed they sometimes make me weep with the
pity I feel for them." "Then you would console them if it was for you
they wept, young lady?" said Dorothea. "I don't know what I should
do," said the girl; "I only know that there are some of those ladies
so cruel that they call their knights tigers and lions and a thousand
other foul names: and Jesus! I don't know what sort of folk they can
be, so unfeeling and heartless, that rather than bestow a glance upon
a worthy man they leave him to die or go mad. I don't know what is the
good of such prudery; if it is for honour's sake, why not marry them?
That's all they want." "Hush, child," said the landlady; "it seems to
me thou knowest a great deal about these things, and it is not fit for
girls to know or talk so much." "As the gentleman asked me, I could
not help answering him," said the girl. "Well then," said the curate,
"bring me these books, senor landlord, for I should like to see them."
"With all my heart," said he, and going into his own room he brought
out an old valise secured with a little chain, on opening which the
curate found in it three large books and some manuscripts written in a
very good hand. The first that he opened he found to be "Don
Cirongilio of Thrace," and the second "Don Felixmarte of Hircania,"
and the other the "History of the Great Captain Gonzalo Hernandez de
Cordova, with the Life of Diego Garcia de Paredes." When the curate
read the two first titles he looked over at the barber and said, "We
want my friend's housekeeper and niece here now." "Nay," said the
barber, "I can do just as well to carry them to the yard or to the
hearth, and there is a very good fire there." "What! your worship
would burn my books!" said the landlord. "Only these two," said the
curate, "Don Cirongilio, and Felixmarte." "Are my books, then,
heretics or phlegmaties that you want to burn them?" said the
landlord. "Schismatics you mean, friend," said the barber, "not
phlegmatics." "That's it," said the landlord; "but if you want to burn
any, let it be that about the Great Captain and that Diego Garcia; for
I would rather have a child of mine burnt than either of the others."
"Brother," said the curate, "those two books are made up of lies, and
are full of folly and nonsense; but this of the Great Captain is a
true history, and contains the deeds of Gonzalo Hernandez of Cordova,
who by his many and great achievements earned the title all over the
world of the Great Captain, a famous and illustrious name, and
deserved by him alone; and this Diego Garcia de Paredes was a
distinguished knight of the city of Trujillo in Estremadura, a most
gallant soldier, and of such bodily strength that with one finger he
stopped a mill-wheel in full motion; and posted with a two-handed
sword at the foot of a bridge he kept the whole of an immense army
from passing over it, and achieved such other exploits that if,
instead of his relating them himself with the modesty of a knight and
of one writing his own history, some free and unbiassed writer had
recorded them, they would have thrown into the shade all the deeds of
the Hectors, Achilleses, and Rolands." "Tell that to my father," said
the landlord. "There's a thing to be astonished at! Stopping a
mill-wheel! By God your worship should read what I have read of
Felixmarte of Hircania, how with one single backstroke he cleft five
giants asunder through the middle as if they had been made of
bean-pods like the little friars the children make; and another time
he attacked a very great and powerful army, in which there were more
than a million six hundred thousand soldiers, all armed from head to
foot, and he routed them all as if they had been flocks of sheep. "And
then, what do you say to the good Cirongilio of Thrace, that was so
stout and bold; as may be seen in the book, where it is related that
as he was sailing along a river there came up out of the midst of the
water against him a fiery serpent, and he, as soon as he saw it, flung
himself upon it and got astride of its scaly shoulders, and squeezed
its throat with both hands with such force that the serpent, finding
he was throttling it, had nothing for it but to let itself sink to the
bottom of the river, carrying with it the knight who would not let go
his hold; and when they got down there he found himself among palaces
and gardens so pretty that it was a wonder to see; and then the
serpent changed itself into an old ancient man, who told him such
things as were never heard. Hold your peace, senor; for if you were to
hear this you would go mad with delight. A couple of figs for your
Great Captain and your Diego Garcia!" Hearing this Dorothea said in a
whisper to Cardenio, "Our landlord is almost fit to play a second part
to Don Quixote." "I think so," said Cardenio, "for, as he shows, he
accepts it as a certainty that everything those books relate took
place exactly as it is written down; and the barefooted friars
themselves would not persuade him to the contrary." "But consider,
brother," said the curate once more, "there never was any Felixmarte
of Hircania in the world, nor any Cirongilio of Thrace, or any of the
other knights of the same sort, that the books of chivalry talk of;
the whole thing is the fabrication and invention of idle wits, devised
by them for the purpose you describe of beguiling the time, as your
reapers do when they read; for I swear to you in all seriousness there
never were any such knights in the world, and no such exploits or
nonsense ever happened anywhere." "Try that bone on another dog," said
the landlord; "as if I did not know how many make five, and where my
shoe pinches me; don't think to feed me with pap, for by God I am no
fool. It is a good joke for your worship to try and persuade me that
everything these good books say is nonsense and lies, and they printed
by the license of the Lords of the Royal Council, as if they were
people who would allow such a lot of lies to be printed all together,
and so many battles and enchantments that they take away one's
senses." "I have told you, friend," said the curate, "that this is
done to divert our idle thoughts; and as in well-ordered states games
of chess, fives, and billiards are allowed for the diversion of those
who do not care, or are not obliged, or are unable to work, so books
of this kind are allowed to be printed, on the supposition that, what
indeed is the truth, there can be nobody so ignorant as to take any of
them for true stories; and if it were permitted me now, and the
present company desired it, I could say something about the qualities
books of chivalry should possess to be good ones, that would be to the
advantage and even to the taste of some; but I hope the time will come
when I can communicate my ideas to some one who may be able to mend
matters; and in the meantime, senor landlord, believe what I have
said, and take your books, and make up your mind about their truth or
falsehood, and much good may they do you; and God grant you may not
fall lame of the same foot your guest Don Quixote halts on." "No fear
of that," returned the landlord; "I shall not be so mad as to make a
knight-errant of myself; for I see well enough that things are not now
as they used to be in those days, when they say those famous knights
roamed about the world." Sancho had made his appearance in the middle
of this conversation, and he was very much troubled and cast down by
what he heard said about knights-errant being now no longer in vogue,
and all books of chivalry being folly and lies; and he resolved in his
heart to accompany his master to the uttermost ends of the earth, if
so be the removal of the wool from those venerable countenances
depended upon it. CHAPTER XLI. OF THE ARRIVAL OF CLAVILENO AND THE END
OF THIS PROTRACTED ADVENTURE And now night came, and with it the
appointed time for the arrival of the famous horse Clavileno, the
non-appearance of which was already beginning to make Don Quixote
uneasy, for it struck him that, as Malambruno was so long about
sending it, either he himself was not the knight for whom the
adventure was reserved, or else Malambruno did not dare to meet him in
single combat. But lo! suddenly there came into the garden four
wild-men all clad in green ivy bearing on their shoulders a great
wooden horse. They placed it on its feet on the ground, and one of the
wild-men said, "Let the knight who has heart for it mount this
machine." Here Sancho exclaimed, "I don't mount, for neither have I
the heart nor am I a knight." "And let the squire, if he has one,"
continued the wild-man, "take his seat on the croup, and let him trust
the valiant Malambruno; for by no sword save his, nor by the malice of
any other, shall he be assailed. It is but to turn this peg the horse
has in his neck, and he will bear them through the air to where
Malambruno awaits them; but lest the vast elevation of their course
should make them giddy, their eyes must be covered until the horse
neighs, which will be the sign of their having completed their
journey." With these words, leaving Clavileno behind them, they
retired with easy dignity the way they came. As soon as the Distressed
One saw the horse, almost in tears she exclaimed to Don Quixote,
"Valiant knight, the promise of Malambruno has proved trustworthy; the
horse has come, our beards are growing, and by every hair in them all
of us implore thee to shave and shear us, as it is only mounting him
with thy squire and making a happy beginning with your new journey."
"That I will, Senora Countess Trifaldi," said Don Quixote, "most
gladly and with right goodwill, without stopping to take a cushion or
put on my spurs, so as not to lose time, such is my desire to see you
and all these duennas shaved clean." "That I won't," said Sancho,
"with good-will or bad-will, or any way at all; and if this shaving
can't be done without my mounting on the croup, my master had better
look out for another squire to go with him, and these ladies for some
other way of making their faces smooth; I'm no witch to have a taste
for travelling through the air. What would my islanders say when they
heard their governor was going, strolling about on the winds? And
another thing, as it is three thousand and odd leagues from this to
Kandy, if the horse tires, or the giant takes huff, we'll be half a
dozen years getting back, and there won't be isle or island in the
world that will know me: and so, as it is a common saying 'in delay
there's danger,' and 'when they offer thee a heifer run with a
halter,' these ladies' beards must excuse me; 'Saint Peter is very
well in Rome;' I mean I am very well in this house where so much is
made of me, and I hope for such a good thing from the master as to see
myself a governor." "Friend Sancho," said the duke at this, "the
island that I have promised you is not a moving one, or one that will
run away; it has roots so deeply buried in the bowels of the earth
that it will be no easy matter to pluck it up or shift it from where
it is; you know as well as I do that there is no sort of office of any
importance that is not obtained by a bribe of some kind, great or
small; well then, that which I look to receive for this government is
that you go with your master Don Quixote, and bring this memorable
adventure to a conclusion; and whether you return on Clavileno as
quickly as his speed seems to promise, or adverse fortune brings you
back on foot travelling as a pilgrim from hostel to hostel and from
inn to inn, you will always find your island on your return where you
left it, and your islanders with the same eagerness they have always
had to receive you as their governor, and my good-will will remain the
same; doubt not the truth of this, Senor Sancho, for that would be
grievously wronging my disposition to serve you." "Say no more,
senor," said Sancho; "I am a poor squire and not equal to carrying so
much courtesy; let my master mount; bandage my eyes and commit me to
God's care, and tell me if I may commend myself to our Lord or call
upon the angels to protect me when we go towering up there." To this
the Trifaldi made answer, "Sancho, you may freely commend yourself to
God or whom you will; for Malambruno though an enchanter is a
Christian, and works his enchantments with great circumspection,
taking very good care not to fall out with anyone." "Well then," said
Sancho, "God and the most holy Trinity of Gaeta give me help!" "Since
the memorable adventure of the fulling mills," said Don Quixote, "I
have never seen Sancho in such a fright as now; were I as
superstitious as others his abject fear would cause me some little
trepidation of spirit. But come here, Sancho, for with the leave of
these gentles I would say a word or two to thee in private;" and
drawing Sancho aside among the trees of the garden and seizing both
his hands he said, "Thou seest, brother Sancho, the long journey we
have before us, and God knows when we shall return, or what leisure or
opportunities this business will allow us; I wish thee therefore to
retire now to thy chamber, as though thou wert going to fetch
something required for the road, and in a trice give thyself if it be
only five hundred lashes on account of the three thousand three
hundred to which thou art bound; it will be all to the good, and to
make a beginning with a thing is to have it half finished." "By God,"
said Sancho, "but your worship must be out of your senses! This is
like the common saying, 'You see me with child, and you want me a
virgin.' Just as I'm about to go sitting on a bare board, your worship
would have me score my backside! Indeed, your worship is not
reasonable. Let us be off to shave these duennas; and on our return I
promise on my word to make such haste to wipe off all that's due as
will satisfy your worship; I can't say more." "Well, I will comfort
myself with that promise, my good Sancho," replied Don Quixote, "and I
believe thou wilt keep it; for indeed though stupid thou art
veracious." "I'm not voracious," said Sancho, "only peckish; but even
if I was a little, still I'd keep my word." With this they went back
to mount Clavileno, and as they were about to do so they were checked
by the same voice, which once more fell upon their ears, singing this
SONNET When heavenward, holy Friendship, thou didst go Soaring to seek
thy home beyond the sky, And take thy seat among the saints on high,
It was thy will to leave on earth below Thy semblance, and upon it to
bestow Thy veil, wherewith at times hypocrisy, Parading in thy shape,
deceives the eye, And makes its vileness bright as virtue show.
Friendship, return to us, or force the cheat That wears it now, thy
livery to restore, By aid whereof sincerity is slain. If thou wilt not
unmask thy counterfeit, This earth will be the prey of strife once
more, As when primaeval discord held its reign. The song ended with a
deep sigh, and again the listeners remained waiting attentively for
the singer to resume; but perceiving that the music had now turned to
sobs and heart-rending moans they determined to find out who the
unhappy being could be whose voice was as rare as his sighs were
piteous, and they had not proceeded far when on turning the corner of
a rock they discovered a man of the same aspect and appearance as
Sancho had described to them when he told them the story of Cardenio.
He, showing no astonishment when he saw them, stood still with his
head bent down upon his breast like one in deep thought, without
raising his eyes to look at them after the first glance when they
suddenly came upon him. The curate, who was aware of his misfortune
and recognised him by the description, being a man of good address,
approached him and in a few sensible words entreated and urged him to
quit a life of such misery, lest he should end it there, which would
be the greatest of all misfortunes. Cardenio was then in his right
mind, free from any attack of that madness which so frequently carried
him away, and seeing them dressed in a fashion so unusual among the
frequenters of those wilds, could not help showing some surprise,
especially when he heard them speak of his case as if it were a
well-known matter (for the curate's words gave him to understand as
much) so he replied to them thus: "I see plainly, sirs, whoever you
may be, that Heaven, whose care it is to succour the good, and even
the wicked very often, here, in this remote spot, cut off from human
intercourse, sends me, though I deserve it not, those who seek to draw
me away from this to some better retreat, showing me by many and
forcible arguments how unreasonably I act in leading the life I do;
but as they know, that if I escape from this evil I shall fall into
another still greater, perhaps they will set me down as a weak-minded
man, or, what is worse, one devoid of reason; nor would it be any
wonder, for I myself can perceive that the effect of the recollection
of my misfortunes is so great and works so powerfully to my ruin, that
in spite of myself I become at times like a stone, without feeling or
consciousness; and I come to feel the truth of it when they tell me
and show me proofs of the things I have done when the terrible fit
overmasters me; and all I can do is bewail my lot in vain, and idly
curse my destiny, and plead for my madness by telling how it was
caused, to any that care to hear it; for no reasonable beings on
learning the cause will wonder at the effects; and if they cannot help
me at least they will not blame me, and the repugnance they feel at my
wild ways will turn into pity for my woes. If it be, sirs, that you
are here with the same design as others have come wah, before you
proceed with your wise arguments, I entreat you to hear the story of
my countless misfortunes, for perhaps when you have heard it you will
spare yourselves the trouble you would take in offering consolation to
grief that is beyond the reach of it." As they, both of them, desired
nothing more than to hear from his own lips the cause of his
suffering, they entreated him to tell it, promising not to do anything
for his relief or comfort that he did not wish; and thereupon the
unhappy gentleman began his sad story in nearly the same words and
manner in which he had related it to Don Quixote and the goatherd a
few days before, when, through Master Elisabad, and Don Quixote's
scrupulous observance of what was due to chivalry, the tale was left
unfinished, as this history has already recorded; but now fortunately
the mad fit kept off, allowed him to tell it to the end; and so,
coming to the incident of the note which Don Fernando had found in the
volume of "Amadis of Gaul," Cardenio said that he remembered it
perfectly and that it was in these words: "Luscinda to Cardenio.
"Every day I discover merits in you that oblige and compel me to hold
you in higher estimation; so if you desire to relieve me of this
obligation without cost to my honour, you may easily do so. I have a
father who knows you and loves me dearly, who without putting any
constraint on my inclination will grant what will be reasonable for
you to have, if it be that you value me as you say and as I believe
you do." "By this letter I was induced, as I told you, to demand
Luscinda for my wife, and it was through it that Luscinda came to be
regarded by Don Fernando as one of the most discreet and prudent women
of the day, and this letter it was that suggested his design of
ruining me before mine could be carried into effect. I told Don
Fernando that all Luscinda's father was waiting for was that mine
should ask her of him, which I did not dare to suggest to him, fearing
that he would not consent to do so; not because he did not know
perfectly well the rank, goodness, virtue, and beauty of Luscinda, and
that she had qualities that would do honour to any family in Spain,
but because I was aware that he did not wish me to marry so soon,
before seeing what the Duke Ricardo would do for me. In short, I told
him I did not venture to mention it to my father, as well on account
of that difficulty, as of many others that discouraged me though I
knew not well what they were, only that it seemed to me that what I
desired was never to come to pass. To all this Don Fernando answered
that he would take it upon himself to speak to my father, and persuade
him to speak to Luscinda's father. O, ambitious Marius! O, cruel
Catiline! O, wicked Sylla! O, perfidious Ganelon! O, treacherous
Vellido! O, vindictive Julian! O, covetous Judas! Traitor, cruel,
vindictive, and perfidious, wherein had this poor wretch failed in his
fidelity, who with such frankness showed thee the secrets and the joys
of his heart? What offence did I commit? What words did I utter, or
what counsels did I give that had not the furtherance of thy honour
and welfare for their aim? But, woe is me, wherefore do I complain?
for sure it is that when misfortunes spring from the stars, descending
from on high they fall upon us with such fury and violence that no
power on earth can check their course nor human device stay their
coming. Who could have thought that Don Fernando, a highborn
gentleman, intelligent, bound to me by gratitude for my services, one
that could win the object of his love wherever he might set his
affections, could have become so obdurate, as they say, as to rob me
of my one ewe lamb that was not even yet in my possession? But laying
aside these useless and unavailing reflections, let us take up the
broken thread of my unhappy story. "To proceed, then: Don Fernando
finding my presence an obstacle to the execution of his treacherous
and wicked design, resolved to send me to his elder brother under the
pretext of asking money from him to pay for six horses which,
purposely, and with the sole object of sending me away that he might
the better carry out his infernal scheme, he had purchased the very
day he offered to speak to my father, and the price of which he now
desired me to fetch. Could I have anticipated this treachery? Could I
by any chance have suspected it? Nay; so far from that, I offered with
the greatest pleasure to go at once, in my satisfaction at the good
bargain that had been made. That night I spoke with Luscinda, and told
her what had been agreed upon with Don Fernando, and how I had strong
hopes of our fair and reasonable wishes being realised. She, as
unsuspicious as I was of the treachery of Don Fernando, bade me try to
return speedily, as she believed the fulfilment of our desires would
be delayed only so long as my father put off speaking to hers. I know
not why it was that on saying this to me her eyes filled with tears,
and there came a lump in her throat that prevented her from uttering a
word of many more that it seemed to me she was striving to say to me.
I was astonished at this unusual turn, which I never before observed
in her. for we always conversed, whenever good fortune and my
ingenuity gave us the chance, with the greatest gaiety and
cheerfulness, mingling tears, sighs, jealousies, doubts, or fears with
our words; it was all on my part a eulogy of my good fortune that
Heaven should have given her to me for my mistress; I glorified her
beauty, I extolled her worth and her understanding; and she paid me
back by praising in me what in her love for me she thought worthy of
praise; and besides we had a hundred thousand trifles and doings of
our neighbours and acquaintances to talk about, and the utmost extent
of my boldness was to take, almost by force, one of her fair white
hands and carry it to my lips, as well as the closeness of the low
grating that separated us allowed me. But the night before the unhappy
day of my departure she wept, she moaned, she sighed, and she withdrew
leaving me filled with perplexity and amazement, overwhelmed at the
sight of such strange and affecting signs of grief and sorrow in
Luscinda; but not to dash my hopes I ascribed it all to the depth of
her love for me and the pain that separation gives those who love
tenderly. At last I took my departure, sad and dejected, my heart
filled with fancies and suspicions, but not knowing well what it was I
suspected or fancied; plain omens pointing to the sad event and
misfortune that was awaiting me. "I reached the place whither I had
been sent, gave the letter to Don Fernando's brother, and was kindly
received but not promptly dismissed, for he desired me to wait, very
much against my will, eight days in some place where the duke his
father was not likely to see me, as his brother wrote that the money
was to be sent without his knowledge; all of which was a scheme of the
treacherous Don Fernando, for his brother had no want of money to
enable him to despatch me at once. "The command was one that exposed
me to the temptation of disobeying it, as it seemed to me impossible
to endure life for so many days separated from Luscinda, especially
after leaving her in the sorrowful mood I have described to you;
nevertheless as a dutiful servant I obeyed, though I felt it would be
at the cost of my well-being. But four days later there came a man in
quest of me with a letter which he gave me, and which by the address I
perceived to be from Luscinda, as the writing was hers. I opened it
with fear and trepidation, persuaded that it must be something serious
that had impelled her to write to me when at a distance, as she seldom
did so when I was near. Before reading it I asked the man who it was
that had given it to him, and how long he had been upon the road; he
told me that as he happened to be passing through one of the streets
of the city at the hour of noon, a very beautiful lady called to him
from a window, and with tears in her eyes said to me, in a low,
agitated voice, 'My lady Dulcinea del Toboso kisses your worship's
hands, and entreats you to do her the favour of letting her know how
you are; and, being in great need, she also entreats your worship as
earnestly as she can to be so good as to lend her half a dozen reals,
or as much as you may have about you, on this new dimity petticoat
that I have here; and she promises to repay them very speedily.' I was
amazed and taken aback by such a message, and turning to Senor
Montesinos I asked him, 'Is it possible, Senor Montesinos, that
persons of distinction under enchantment can be in need?' To which he
replied, 'Believe me, Senor Don Quixote, that which is called need is
to be met with everywhere, and penetrates all quarters and reaches
everyone, and does not spare even the enchanted; and as the lady
Dulcinea del Toboso sends to beg those six reals, and the pledge is to
all appearance a good one, there is nothing for it but to squeeze our
shoulders together, hold our breath, shut our eyes, and let ourselves
go where luck and the blanket may send us." "Thou art a bad Christian,
Sancho," said Don Quixote on hearing this, "for once an injury has
been done thee thou never forgettest it: but know that it is the part
of noble and generous hearts not to attach importance to trifles. What
lame leg hast thou got by it, what broken rib, what cracked head, that
thou canst not forget that jest? For jest and sport it was, properly
regarded, and had I not seen it in that light I would have returned
and done more mischief in revenging thee than the Greeks did for the
rape of Helen, who, if she were alive now, or if my Dulcinea had lived
then, might depend upon it she would not be so famous for her beauty
as she is;" and here he heaved a sigh and sent it aloft; and said
Sancho, "Let it pass for a jest as it cannot be revenged in earnest,
but I know what sort of jest and earnest it was, and I know it will
never be rubbed out of my memory any more than off my shoulders. But
putting that aside, will your worship tell me what are we to do with
this dapple-grey steed that looks like a grey ass, which that Martino
that your worship overthrew has left deserted here? for, from the way
he took to his heels and bolted, he is not likely ever to come back
for it; and by my beard but the grey is a good one." "I have never
been in the habit," said Don Quixote, "of taking spoil of those whom I
vanquish, nor is it the practice of chivalry to take away their horses
and leave them to go on foot, unless indeed it be that the victor have
lost his own in the combat, in which case it is lawful to take that of
the vanquished as a thing won in lawful war; therefore, Sancho, leave
this horse, or ass, or whatever thou wilt have it to be; for when its
owner sees us gone hence he will come back for it." "God knows I
should like to take it," returned Sancho, "or at least to change it
for my own, which does not seem to me as good a one: verily the laws
of chivalry are strict, since they cannot be stretched to let one ass
be changed for another; I should like to know if I might at least
change trappings." "On that head I am not quite certain," answered Don
Quixote, "and the matter being doubtful, pending better information, I
say thou mayest change them, if so be thou hast urgent need of them."
"So urgent is it," answered Sancho, "that if they were for my own
person I could not want them more;" and forthwith, fortified by this
licence, he effected the mutatio capparum, rigging out his beast to
the ninety-nines and making quite another thing of it. This done, they
broke their fast on the remains of the spoils of war plundered from
the sumpter mule, and drank of the brook that flowed from the fulling
mills, without casting a look in that direction, in such loathing did
they hold them for the alarm they had caused them; and, all anger and
gloom removed, they mounted and, without taking any fixed road (not to
fix upon any being the proper thing for true knights-errant), they set
out, guided by Rocinante's will, which carried along with it that of
his master, not to say that of the ass, which always followed him
wherever he led, lovingly and sociably; nevertheless they returned to
the high road, and pursued it at a venture without any other aim. As
they went along, then, in this way Sancho said to his master, "Senor,
would your worship give me leave to speak a little to you? For since
you laid that hard injunction of silence on me several things have
gone to rot in my stomach, and I have now just one on the tip of my
tongue that I don't want to be spoiled." "Say, on, Sancho," said Don
Quixote, "and be brief in thy discourse, for there is no pleasure in
one that is long." "Well then, senor," returned Sancho, "I say that
for some days past I have been considering how little is got or gained
by going in search of these adventures that your worship seeks in
these wilds and cross-roads, where, even if the most perilous are
victoriously achieved, there is no one to see or know of them, and so
they must be left untold for ever, to the loss of your worship's
object and the credit they deserve; therefore it seems to me it would
be better (saving your worship's better judgment) if we were to go and
serve some emperor or other great prince who may have some war on
hand, in whose service your worship may prove the worth of your
person, your great might, and greater understanding, on perceiving
which the lord in whose service we may be will perforce have to reward
us, each according to his merits; and there you will not be at a loss
for some one to set down your achievements in writing so as to
preserve their memory for ever. Of my own I say nothing, as they will
not go beyond squirely limits, though I make bold to say that, if it
be the practice in chivalry to write the achievements of squires, I
think mine must not be left out." "Thou speakest not amiss, Sancho,"
answered Don Quixote, "but before that point is reached it is
requisite to roam the world, as it were on probation, seeking
adventures, in order that, by achieving some, name and fame may be
acquired, such that when he betakes himself to the court of some great
monarch the knight may be already known by his deeds, and that the
boys, the instant they see him enter the gate of the city, may all
follow him and surround him, crying, 'This is the Knight of the
Sun'-or the Serpent, or any other title under which he may have
achieved great deeds. 'This,' they will say, 'is he who vanquished in
single combat the gigantic Brocabruno of mighty strength; he who
delivered the great Mameluke of Persia out of the long enchantment
under which he had been for almost nine hundred years.' So from one to
another they will go proclaiming his achievements; and presently at
the tumult of the boys and the others the king of that kingdom will
appear at the windows of his royal palace, and as soon as he beholds
the knight, recognising him by his arms and the device on his shield,
he will as a matter of course say, 'What ho! Forth all ye, the knights
of my court, to receive the flower of chivalry who cometh hither!' At
which command all will issue forth, and he himself, advancing half-way
down the stairs, will embrace him closely, and salute him, kissing him
on the cheek, and will then lead him to the queen's chamber, where the
knight will find her with the princess her daughter, who will be one
of the most beautiful and accomplished damsels that could with the
utmost pains be discovered anywhere in the known world. Straightway it
will come to pass that she will fix her eyes upon the knight and he
his upon her, and each will seem to the other something more divine
than human, and, without knowing how or why they will be taken and
entangled in the inextricable toils of love, and sorely distressed in
their hearts not to see any way of making their pains and sufferings
known by speech. Thence they will lead him, no doubt, to some richly
adorned chamber of the palace, where, having removed his armour, they
will bring him a rich mantle of scarlet wherewith to robe himself, and
if he looked noble in his armour he will look still more so in a
doublet. When night comes he will sup with the king, queen, and
princess; and all the time he will never take his eyes off her,
stealing stealthy glances, unnoticed by those present, and she will do
the same, and with equal cautiousness, being, as I have said, a damsel
of great discretion. The tables being removed, suddenly through the
door of the hall there will enter a hideous and diminutive dwarf
followed by a fair dame, between two giants, who comes with a certain
adventure, the work of an ancient sage; and he who shall achieve it
shall be deemed the best knight in the world. "The king will then
command all those present to essay it, and none will bring it to an
end and conclusion save the stranger knight, to the great enhancement
of his fame, whereat the princess will be overjoyed and will esteem
herself happy and fortunate in having fixed and placed her thoughts so
high. And the best of it is that this king, or prince, or whatever he
is, is engaged in a very bitter war with another as powerful as
himself, and the stranger knight, after having been some days at his
court, requests leave from him to go and serve him in the said war.
The king will grant it very readily, and the knight will courteously
kiss his hands for the favour done to him; and that night he will take
leave of his lady the princess at the grating of the chamber where she
sleeps, which looks upon a garden, and at which he has already many
times conversed with her, the go-between and confidante in the matter
being a damsel much trusted by the princess. He will sigh, she will
swoon, the damsel will fetch water, much distressed because morning
approaches, and for the honour of her lady he would not that they were
discovered; at last the princess will come to herself and will present
her white hands through the grating to the knight, who will kiss them
a thousand and a thousand times, bathing them with his tears. It will
be arranged between them how they are to inform each other of their
good or evil fortunes, and the princess will entreat him to make his
absence as short as possible, which he will promise to do with many
oaths; once more he kisses her hands, and takes his leave in such
grief that he is well-nigh ready to die. He betakes him thence to his
chamber, flings himself on his bed, cannot sleep for sorrow at
parting, rises early in the morning, goes to take leave of the king,
queen, and princess, and, as he takes his leave of the pair, it is
told him that the princess is indisposed and cannot receive a visit;
the knight thinks it is from grief at his departure, his heart is
pierced, and he is hardly able to keep from showing his pain. The
confidante is present, observes all, goes to tell her mistress, who
listens with tears and says that one of her greatest distresses is not
knowing who this knight is, and whether he is of kingly lineage or
not; the damsel assures her that so much courtesy, gentleness, and
gallantry of bearing as her knight possesses could not exist in any
save one who was royal and illustrious; her anxiety is thus relieved,
and she strives to be of good cheer lest she should excite suspicion
in her parents, and at the end of two days she appears in public.
Meanwhile the knight has taken his departure; he fights in the war,
conquers the king's enemy, wins many cities, triumphs in many battles,
returns to the court, sees his lady where he was wont to see her, and
it is agreed that he shall demand her in marriage of her parents as
the reward of his services; the king is unwilling to give her, as he
knows not who he is, but nevertheless, whether carried off or in
whatever other way it may be, the princess comes to be his bride, and
her father comes to regard it as very good fortune; for it so happens
that this knight is proved to be the son of a valiant king of some
kingdom, I know not what, for I fancy it is not likely to be on the
map. The father dies, the princess inherits, and in two words the
knight becomes king. And here comes in at once the bestowal of rewards
upon his squire and all who have aided him in rising to so exalted a
rank. He marries his squire to a damsel of the princess's, who will
be, no doubt, the one who was confidante in their amour, and is
daughter of a very great duke." "That's what I want, and no mistake
about it!" said Sancho. "That's what I'm waiting for; for all this,
word for word, is in store for your worship under the title of the
Knight of the Rueful Countenance." "Thou needst not doubt it, Sancho,"
replied Don Quixote, "for in the same manner, and by the same steps as
I have described here, knights-errant rise and have risen to be kings
and emperors; all we want now is to find out what king, Christian or
pagan, is at war and has a beautiful daughter; but there will be time
enough to think of that, for, as I have told thee, fame must be won in
other quarters before repairing to the court. There is another thing,
too, that is wanting; for supposing we find a king who is at war and
has a beautiful daughter, and that I have won incredible fame
throughout the universe, I know not how it can be made out that I am
of royal lineage, or even second cousin to an emperor; for the king
will not be willing to give me his daughter in marriage unless he is
first thoroughly satisfied on this point, however much my famous deeds
may deserve it; so that by this deficiency I fear I shall lose what my
arm has fairly earned. True it is I am a gentleman of known house, of
estate and property, and entitled to the five hundred sueldos mulct;
and it may be that the sage who shall write my history will so clear
up my ancestry and pedigree that I may find myself fifth or sixth in
descent from a king; for I would have thee know, Sancho, that wounds
caused by any instruments which happen by chance to be in hand inflict
no indignity, and this is laid down in the law of the duel in express
words: if, for instance, the cobbler strikes another with the last
which he has in his hand, though it be in fact a piece of wood, it
cannot be said for that reason that he whom he struck with it has been
cudgelled. I say this lest thou shouldst imagine that because we have
been drubbed in this affray we have therefore suffered any indignity;
for the arms those men carried, with which they pounded us, were
nothing more than their stakes, and not one of them, so far as I
remember, carried rapier, sword, or dagger." "They gave me no time to
see that much," answered Sancho, "for hardly had I laid hand on my
tizona when they signed the cross on my shoulders with their sticks in
such style that they took the sight out of my eyes and the strength
out of my feet, stretching me where I now lie, and where thinking of
whether all those stake-strokes were an indignity or not gives me no
uneasiness, which the pain of the blows does, for they will remain as
deeply impressed on my memory as on my shoulders." "For all that let
me tell thee, brother Panza," said Don Quixote, "that there is no
recollection which time does not put an end to, and no pain which
death does not remove." "And what greater misfortune can there be,"
replied Panza, "than the one that waits for time to put an end to it
and death to remove it? If our mishap were one of those that are cured
with a couple of plasters, it would not be so bad; but thou hast the
gift of making fools and blockheads of all who have anything to do
with thee or say to thee. Why, look at these gentlemen bearing thee
company! Get thee home, blockhead, and see after thy affairs, and thy
wife and children, and give over these fooleries that are sapping thy
brains and skimming away thy wits." "Go your own way, brother," said
Don Antonio, "and don't offer advice to those who don't ask you for
it. Senor Don Quixote is in his full senses, and we who bear him
company are not fools; virtue is to be honoured wherever it may be
found; go, and bad luck to you, and don't show your face in all this
island, or within six leagues of it on any side, under pain of two
hundred lashes; be off at once, I say, you shameless, cheating shrew."
The woman was cowed and went off disconsolately, hanging her head; and
the governor said to the man, "Honest man, go home with your money,
and God speed you; and for the future, if you don't want to lose it,
see that you don't take it into your head to yoke with anybody." The
man thanked him as clumsily as he could and went his way, and the
bystanders were again filled with admiration at their new governor's
judgments and sentences. Next, two men, one apparently a farm
labourer, and the other a tailor, for he had a pair of shears in his
hand, presented themselves before him, and the tailor said, "Senor
governor, this labourer and I come before your worship by reason of
this honest man coming to my shop yesterday (for saving everybody's
presence I'm a passed tailor, God be thanked), and putting a piece of
cloth into my hands and asking me, 'Senor, will there be enough in
this cloth to make me a cap?' Measuring the cloth I said there would.
He probably suspected--as I supposed, and I supposed right--that I
wanted to steal some of the cloth, led to think so by his own roguery
and the bad opinion people have of tailors; and he told me to see if
there would be enough for two. I guessed what he would be at, and I
said 'yes.' He, still following up his original unworthy notion, went
on adding cap after cap, and I 'yes' after 'yes,' until we got as far
as five. He has just this moment come for them; I gave them to him,
but he won't pay me for the making; on the contrary, he calls upon me
to pay him, or else return his cloth." "Is all this true, brother?"
said Sancho. "Yes," replied the man; "but will your worship make him
show the five caps he has made me?" "With all my heart," said the
tailor; and drawing his hand from under his cloak he showed five caps
stuck upon the five fingers of it, and said, "there are the caps this
good man asks for; and by God and upon my conscience I haven't a scrap
of cloth left, and I'll let the work be examined by the inspectors of
the trade." All present laughed at the number of caps and the novelty
of the suit; Sancho set himself to think for a moment, and then said,
"It seems to me that in this case it is not necessary to deliver
long-winded arguments, but only to give off-hand the judgment of an
honest man; and so my decision is that the tailor lose the making and
the labourer the cloth, and that the caps go to the prisoners in the
gaol, and let there be no more about it." If the previous decision
about the cattle dealer's purse excited the admiration of the
bystanders, this provoked their laughter; however, the governor's
orders were after all executed. All this, having been taken down by
his chronicler, was at once despatched to the duke, who was looking
out for it with great eagerness; and here let us leave the good
Sancho; for his master, sorely troubled in mind by Altisidora's music,
has pressing claims upon us now. CHAPTER XLVI. OF THE TERRIBLE BELL
AND CAT FRIGHT THAT DON QUIXOTE GOT IN THE COURSE OF THE ENAMOURED
ALTISIDORA'S WOOING We left Don Quixote wrapped up in the reflections
which the music of the enamourned maid Altisidora had given rise to.
He went to bed with them, and just like fleas they would not let him
sleep or get a moment's rest, and the broken stitches of his stockings
helped them. But as Time is fleet and no obstacle can stay his course,
he came riding on the hours, and morning very soon arrived. Seeing
which Don Quixote quitted the soft down, and, nowise slothful, dressed
himself in his chamois suit and put on his travelling boots to hide
the disaster to his stockings. He threw over him his scarlet mantle,
put on his head a montera of green satin that the damsels had given
him, and thus arrayed passed out into the large room, where he found
the damsels drawn up in double file, the same number on each side, all
with the appliances for washing the hands, which they presented to him
with profuse obeisances and ceremonies. Then came twelve pages,
together with the seneschal, to lead him to dinner, as his hosts were
already waiting for him. They placed him in the midst of them, and
with much pomp and stateliness they conducted him into another room,
where there was a sumptuous table laid with but four covers. The
duchess and the duke came out to the door of the room to receive him,
and with them a grave ecclesiastic, one of those who rule noblemen's
houses; one of those who, not being born magnates themselves, never
know how to teach those who are how to behave as such; one of those
who would have the greatness of great folk measured by their own
narrowness of mind; one of those who, when they try to introduce
economy into the household they rule, lead it into meanness. One of
this sort, I say, must have been the grave churchman who came out with
the duke and duchess to receive Don Quixote. A vast number of polite
speeches were exchanged, and at length, taking Don Quixote between
them, they proceeded to sit down to table. The duke pressed Don
Quixote to take the head of the table, and, though he refused, the
entreaties of the duke were so urgent that he had to accept it. The
ecclesiastic took his seat opposite to him, and the duke and duchess
those at the sides. All this time Sancho stood by, gaping with
amazement at the honour he saw shown to his master by these
illustrious persons; and observing all the ceremonious pressing that
had passed between the duke and Don Quixote to induce him to take his
seat at the head of the table, he said, "If your worship will give me
leave I will tell you a story of what happened in my village about
this matter of seats." The moment Sancho said this Don Quixote
trembled, making sure that he was about to say something foolish.
Sancho glanced at him, and guessing his thoughts, said, "Don't be
afraid of my going astray, senor, or saying anything that won't be pat
to the purpose; I haven't forgotten the advice your worship gave me
just now about talking much or little, well or ill." "I have no
recollection of anything, Sancho," said Don Quixote; "say what thou
wilt, only say it quickly." "Well then," said Sancho, "what I am going
to say is so true that my master Don Quixote, who is here present,
will keep me from lying." "Lie as much as thou wilt for all I care,
Sancho," said Don Quixote, "for I am not going to stop thee, but
consider what thou art going to say." "I have so considered and
reconsidered," said Sancho, "that the bell-ringer's in a safe berth;
as will be seen by what follows." "It would be well," said Don
Quixote, "if your highnesses would order them to turn out this idiot,
for he will talk a heap of nonsense." "By the life of the duke, Sancho
shall not be taken away from me for a moment," said the duchess; "I am
very fond of him, for I know he is very discreet." "Discreet be the
days of your holiness," said Sancho, "for the good opinion you have of
my wit, though there's none in me; but the story I want to tell is
this. There was an invitation given by a gentleman of my town, a very
rich one, and one of quality, for he was one of the Alamos of Medina
del Campo, and married to Dona Mencia de Quinones, the daughter of Don
Alonso de Maranon, Knight of the Order of Santiago, that was drowned
at the Herradura--him there was that quarrel about years ago in our
village, that my master Don Quixote was mixed up in, to the best of my
belief, that Tomasillo the scapegrace, the son of Balbastro the smith,
was wounded in.--Isn't all this true, master mine? As you live, say
so, that these gentlefolk may not take me for some lying chatterer."
"So far," said the ecclesiastic, "I take you to be more a chatterer
than a liar; but I don't know what I shall take you for by-and-by."
"Thou citest so many witnesses and proofs, Sancho," said Don Quixote,
"that I have no choice but to say thou must be telling the truth; go
on, and cut the story short, for thou art taking the way not to make
an end for two days to come." "He is not to cut it short," said the
duchess; "on the contrary, for my gratification, he is to tell it as
he knows it, though he should not finish it these six days; and if he
took so many they would be to me the pleasantest I ever spent." "Well
then, sirs, I say," continued Sancho, "that this same gentleman, whom
I know as well as I do my own hands, for it's not a bowshot from my
house to his, invited a poor but respectable labourer-" "Get on,
brother," said the churchman; "at the rate you are going you will not
stop with your story short of the next world." "I'll stop less than
half-way, please God," said Sancho; "and so I say this labourer,
coming to the house of the gentleman I spoke of that invited him--rest
his soul, he is now dead; and more by token he died the death of an
angel, so they say; for I was not there, for just at that time I had
gone to reap at Tembleque-" "As you live, my son," said the churchman,
"make haste back from Tembleque, and finish your story without burying
the gentleman, unless you want to make more funerals." "Well then, it
so happened," said Sancho, "that as the pair of them were going to sit
down to table, as I said, the labourer insisted upon the gentleman's
taking the head of the table, and the landlord sat down with him, for
he was no less fond of cow-heel and calves' feet than Sancho was.
While at supper Don Juan asked Don Quixote what news he had of the
lady Dulcinea, and if he had sent her any presents of giants or
miscreants lately, for he could not but have vanquished a good many.
To which Don Quixote replied, "Senora, my misfortunes, though they had
a beginning, will never have an end. I have vanquished giants and I
have sent her caitiffs and miscreants; but where are they to find her
if she is enchanted and turned into the most ill-favoured peasant
wench that can be imagined?" "I don't know," said Sancho Panza; "to me
she seems the fairest creature in the world; at any rate, in
nimbleness and jumping she won't give in to a tumbler; by my faith,
senora duchess, she leaps from the ground on to the back of an ass
like a cat." "Have you seen her enchanted, Sancho?" asked the duke.
"What, seen her!" said Sancho; "why, who the devil was it but myself
that first thought of the enchantment business? She is as much
enchanted as my father." The ecclesiastic, when he heard them talking
of giants and caitiffs and enchantments, began to suspect that this
must be Don Quixote of La Mancha, whose story the duke was always
reading; and he had himself often reproved him for it, telling him it
was foolish to read such fooleries; and becoming convinced that his
suspicion was correct, addressing the duke, he said very angrily to
him, "Senor, your excellence will have to give account to God for what
this good man does. This Don Quixote, or Don Simpleton, or whatever
his name is, cannot, I imagine, be such a blockhead as your excellence
would have him, holding out encouragement to him to go on with his
vagaries and follies." Then turning to address Don Quixote he said,
"And you, num-skull, who put it into your head that you are a
knight-errant, and vanquish giants and capture miscreants? Go your
ways in a good hour, and in a good hour be it said to you. Go home and
bring up your children if you have any, and attend to your business,
and give over going wandering about the world, gaping and making a
laughing-stock of yourself to all who know you and all who don't.
Where, in heaven's name, have you discovered that there are or ever
were knights-errant? Where are there giants in Spain or miscreants in
La Mancha, or enchanted Dulcineas, or all the rest of the silly things
they tell about you?" Don Quixote listened attentively to the reverend
gentleman's words, and as soon as he perceived he had done speaking,
regardless of the presence of the duke and duchess, he sprang to his
feet with angry looks and an agitated countenance, and said--But the
reply deserves a chapter to itself. CHAPTER XXXII. OF THE REPLY DON
QUIXOTE GAVE HIS CENSURER, WITH OTHER INCIDENTS, GRAVE AND DROLL
CHAPTER XXXIII OF THE DELECTABLE DISCOURSE WHICH THE DUCHESS AND HER
DAMSELS HELD WITH SANCHO PANZA, WELL WORTH READING AND NOTING CHAPTER
XXXIV WHICH RELATES HOW THEY LEARNED THE WAY IN WHICH THEY WERE TO
DISENCHANT THE PEERLESS DULCINEA DEL TOBOSO, WHICH IS ONE OF THE
RAREST ADVENTURES IN THIS BOOK Great was the pleasure the duke and
duchess took in the conversation of Don Quixote and Sancho Panza; and,
more bent than ever upon the plan they had of practising some jokes
upon them that should have the look and appearance of adventures, they
took as their basis of action what Don Quixote had already told them
about the cave of Montesinos, in order to play him a famous one. But
what the duchess marvelled at above all was that Sancho's simplicity
could be so great as to make him believe as absolute truth that
Dulcinea had been enchanted, when it was he himself who had been the
enchanter and trickster in the business. Having, therefore, instructed
their servants in everything they were to do, six days afterwards they
took him out to hunt, with as great a retinue of huntsmen and beaters
as a crowned king. They presented Don Quixote with a hunting suit, and
Sancho with another of the finest green cloth; but Don Quixote
declined to put his on, saying that he must soon return to the hard
pursuit of arms, and could not carry wardrobes or stores with him.
Sancho, however, took what they gave him, meaning to sell it the first
opportunity. The appointed day having arrived, Don Quixote armed
himself, and Sancho arrayed himself, and mounted on his Dapple (for he
would not give him up though they offered him a horse), he placed
himself in the midst of the troop of huntsmen. The duchess came out
splendidly attired, and Don Quixote, in pure courtesy and politeness,
held the rein of her palfrey, though the duke wanted not to allow him;
and at last they reached a wood that lay between two high mountains,
where, after occupying various posts, ambushes, and paths, and
distributing the party in different positions, the hunt began with
great noise, shouting, and hallooing, so that, between the baying of
the hounds and the blowing of the horns, they could not hear one
another. The duchess dismounted, and with a sharp boar-spear in her
hand posted herself where she knew the wild boars were in the habit of
passing. The duke and Don Quixote likewise dismounted and placed
themselves one at each side of her. Sancho took up a position in the
rear of all without dismounting from Dapple, whom he dared not desert
lest some mischief should befall him. Scarcely had they taken their
stand in a line with several of their servants, when they saw a huge
boar, closely pressed by the hounds and followed by the huntsmen,
making towards them, grinding his teeth and tusks, and scattering foam
from his mouth. As soon as he saw him Don Quixote, bracing his shield
on his arm, and drawing his sword, advanced to meet him; the duke with
boar-spear did the same; but the duchess would have gone in front of
them all had not the duke prevented her. Sancho alone, deserting
Dapple at the sight of the mighty beast, took to his heels as hard as
he could and strove in vain to mount a tall oak. As he was clinging to
a branch, however, half-way up in his struggle to reach the top, the
bough, such was his ill-luck and hard fate, gave way, and caught in
his fall by a broken limb of the oak, he hung suspended in the air
unable to reach the ground. Finding himself in this position, and that
the green coat was beginning to tear, and reflecting that if the
fierce animal came that way he might be able to get at him, he began
to utter such cries, and call for help so earnestly, that all who
heard him and did not see him felt sure he must be in the teeth of
some wild beast. In the end the tusked boar fell pierced by the blades
of the many spears they held in front of him; and Don Quixote, turning
round at the cries of Sancho, for he knew by them that it was he, saw
him hanging from the oak head downwards, with Dapple, who did not
forsake him in his distress, close beside him; and Cide Hamete
observes that he seldom saw Sancho Panza without seeing Dapple, or
Dapple without seeing Sancho Panza; such was their attachment and
loyalty one to the other. Don Quixote went over and unhooked Sancho,
who, as soon as he found himself on the ground, looked at the rent in
his huntingcoat and was grieved to the heart, for he thought he had
got a patrimonial estate in that suit. Meanwhile they had slung the
mighty boar across the back of a mule, and having covered it with
sprigs of rosemary and branches of myrtle, they bore it away as the
spoils of victory to some large field-tents which had been pitched in
the middle of the wood, where they found the tables laid and dinner
served, in such grand and sumptuous style that it was easy to see the
rank and magnificence of those who had provided it. Sancho, as he
showed the rents in his torn suit to the duchess, observed, "If we had
been hunting hares, or after small birds, my coat would have been safe
from being in the plight it's in; I don't know what pleasure one can
find in lying in wait for an animal that may take your life with his
tusk if he gets at you. I recollect having heard an old ballad sung
that says, By bears be thou devoured, as erst Was famous Favila."
"That," said Don Quixote, "was a Gothic king, who, going a-hunting,
was devoured by a bear." "Just so," said Sancho; "and I would not have
kings and princes expose themselves to such dangers for the sake of a
pleasure which, to my mind, ought not to be one, as it consists in
killing an animal that has done no harm whatever." "Quite the
contrary, Sancho; you are wrong there," said the duke; "for hunting is
more suitable and requisite for kings and princes than for anybody
else. The chase is the emblem of war; it has stratagems, wiles, and
crafty devices for overcoming the enemy in safety; in it extreme cold
and intolerable heat have to be borne, indolence and sleep are
despised, the bodily powers are invigorated, the limbs of him who
engages in it are made supple, and, in a word, it is a pursuit which
may be followed without injury to anyone and with enjoyment to many;
and the best of it is, it is not for everybody, as field-sports of
other sorts are, except hawking, which also is only for kings and
great lords. Reconsider your opinion therefore, Sancho, and when you
are governor take to hunting, and you will find the good of it."
"Nay," said Sancho, "the good governor should have a broken leg and
keep at home;" it would be a nice thing if, after people had been at
the trouble of coming to look for him on business, the governor were
to be away in the forest enjoying himself; the government would go on
badly in that fashion. By my faith, senor, hunting and amusements are
more fit for idlers than for governors; what I intend to amuse myself
with is playing all fours at Eastertime, and bowls on Sundays and
holidays; for these huntings don't suit my condition or agree with my
conscience." "God grant it may turn out so," said the duke; "because
it's a long step from saying to doing." "Be that as it may," said
Sancho, "'pledges don't distress a good payer,' and 'he whom God helps
does better than he who gets up early,' and 'it's the tripes that
carry the feet and not the feet the tripes;' I mean to say that if God
gives me help and I do my duty honestly, no doubt I'll govern better
than a gerfalcon. Nay, let them only put a finger in my mouth, and
they'll see whether I can bite or not." "The curse of God and all his
saints upon thee, thou accursed Sancho!" exclaimed Don Quixote; "when
will the day come--as I have often said to thee--when I shall hear
thee make one single coherent, rational remark without proverbs? Pray,
your highnesses, leave this fool alone, for he will grind your souls
between, not to say two, but two thousand proverbs, dragged in as much
in season, and as much to the purpose as--may God grant as much health
to him, or to me if I want to listen to them!" "Sancho Panza's
proverbs," said the duchess, "though more in number than the Greek
Commander's, are not therefore less to be esteemed for the conciseness
of the maxims. For my own part, I can say they give me more pleasure
than others that may be better brought in and more seasonably
introduced." In pleasant conversation of this sort they passed out of
the tent into the wood, and the day was spent in visiting some of the
posts and hiding-places, and then night closed in, not, however, as
brilliantly or tranquilly as might have been expected at the season,
for it was then midsummer; but bringing with it a kind of haze that
greatly aided the project of the duke and duchess; and thus, as night
began to fall, and a little after twilight set in, suddenly the whole
wood on all four sides seemed to be on fire, and shortly after, here,
there, on all sides, a vast number of trumpets and other military
instruments were heard, as if several troops of cavalry were passing
through the wood. The blaze of the fire and the noise of the warlike
instruments almost blinded the eyes and deafened the ears of those
that stood by, and indeed of all who were in the wood. Then there were
heard repeated lelilies after the fashion of the Moors when they rush
to battle; trumpets and clarions brayed, drums beat, fifes played, so
unceasingly and so fast that he could not have had any senses who did
not lose them with the confused din of so many instruments. The duke
was astounded, the duchess amazed, Don Quixote wondering, Sancho Panza
trembling, and indeed, even they who were aware of the cause were
frightened. In their fear, silence fell upon them, and a postillion,
in the guise of a demon, passed in front of them, blowing, in lieu of
a bugle, a huge hollow horn that gave out a horrible hoarse note. "Ho
there! brother courier," cried the duke, "who are you? Where are you
going? What troops are these that seem to be passing through the
wood?" To which the courier replied in a harsh, discordant voice, "I
am the devil; I am in search of Don Quixote of La Mancha; those who
are coming this way are six troops of enchanters, who are bringing on
a triumphal car the peerless Dulcinea del Toboso; she comes under
enchantment, together with the gallant Frenchman Montesinos, to give
instructions to Don Quixote as to how, she the said lady, may be
disenchanted." "If you were the devil, as you say and as your
appearance indicates," said the duke, "you would have known the said
knight Don Quixote of La Mancha, for you have him here before you."
"By God and upon my conscience," said the devil, "I never observed it,
for my mind is occupied with so many different things that I was
forgetting the main thing I came about." "This demon must be an honest
fellow and a good Christian," said Sancho; "for if he wasn't he
wouldn't swear by God and his conscience; I feel sure now there must
be good souls even in hell itself." Without dismounting, the demon
then turned to Don Quixote and said, "The unfortunate but valiant
knight Montesinos sends me to thee, the Knight of the Lions (would
that I saw thee in their claws), bidding me tell thee to wait for him
wherever I may find thee, as he brings with him her whom they call
Dulcinea del Toboso, that he may show thee what is needful in order to
disenchant her; and as I came for no more I need stay no longer;
demons of my sort be with thee, and good angels with these gentles;"
and so saying he blew his huge horn, turned about and went off without
waiting for a reply from anyone. They all felt fresh wonder, but
particularly Sancho and Don Quixote; Sancho to see how, in defiance of
the truth, they would have it that Dulcinea was enchanted; Don Quixote
because he could not feel sure whether what had happened to him in the
cave of Montesinos were dreams or realities, for to him they appeared
to partake of both. Upon this Master Pedro, without answering, went
back to fetch the ape, and, having placed it in front of Don Quixote
and Sancho, said: "See here, senor ape, this gentleman wishes to know
whether certain things which happened to him in the cave called the
cave of Montesinos were false or true." On his making the usual sign
the ape mounted on his left shoulder and seemed to whisper in his ear,
and Master Pedro said at once, "The ape says that the things you saw
or that happened to you in that cave are, part of them false, part
true; and that he only knows this and no more as regards this
question; but if your worship wishes to know more, on Friday next he
will answer all that may be asked him, for his virtue is at present
exhausted, and will not return to him till Friday, as he has said."
"Did I not say, senor," said Sancho, "that I could not bring myself to
believe that all your worship said about the adventures in the cave
was true, or even the half of it?" "The course of events will tell,
Sancho," replied Don Quixote; "time, that discloses all things, leaves
nothing that it does not drag into the light of day, though it be
buried in the bosom of the earth. But enough of that for the present;
let us go and see Master Pedro's show, for I am sure there must be
something novel in it." "Something!" said Master Pedro; "this show of
mine has sixty thousand novel things in it; let me tell you, Senor Don
Quixote, it is one of the best-worth-seeing things in the world this
day; but operibus credite et non verbis, and now let's get to work,
for it is growing late, and we have a great deal to do and to say and
show." Don Quixote and Sancho obeyed him and went to where the show
was already put up and uncovered, set all around with lighted wax
tapers which made it look splendid and bright. When they came to it
Master Pedro ensconced himself inside it, for it was he who had to
work the puppets, and a boy, a servant of his, posted himself outside
to act as showman and explain the mysteries of the exhibition, having
a wand in his hand to point to the figures as they came out. And so,
all who were in the inn being arranged in front of the show, some of
them standing, and Don Quixote, Sancho, the page, and cousin,
accommodated with the best places, the interpreter began to say what
he will hear or see who reads or hears the next chapter. CHAPTER XXVI.
WHEREIN IS CONTINUED THE DROLL ADVENTURE OF THE PUPPET-SHOWMAN,
TOGETHER WITH OTHER THINGS IN TRUTH RIGHT GOOD All were silent,
Tyrians and Trojans; I mean all who were watching the show were
hanging on the lips of the interpreter of its wonders, when drums and
trumpets were heard to sound inside it and cannon to go off. The noise
was soon over, and then the boy lifted up his voice and said, "This
true story which is here represented to your worships is taken word
for word from the French chronicles and from the Spanish ballads that
are in everybody's mouth, and in the mouth of the boys about the
streets. Its subject is the release by Senor Don Gaiferos of his wife
Melisendra, when a captive in Spain at the hands of the Moors in the
city of Sansuena, for so they called then what is now called
Saragossa; and there you may see how Don Gaiferos is playing at the
tables, just as they sing it-- At tables playing Don Gaiferos sits,
For Melisendra is forgotten now. And that personage who appears there
with a crown on his head and a sceptre in his hand is the Emperor
Charlemagne, the supposed father of Melisendra, who, angered to see
his son-in-law's inaction and unconcern, comes in to chide him; and
observe with what vehemence and energy he chides him, so that you
would fancy he was going to give him half a dozen raps with his
sceptre; and indeed there are authors who say he did give them, and
sound ones too; and after having said a great deal to him about
imperilling his honour by not effecting the release of his wife, he
said, so the tale runs, Enough I've said, see to it now. Observe, too,
how the emperor turns away, and leaves Don Gaiferos fuming; and you
see now how in a burst of anger, he flings the table and the board far
from him and calls in haste for his armour, and asks his cousin Don
Roland for the loan of his sword, Durindana, and how Don Roland
refuses to lend it, offering him his company in the difficult
enterprise he is undertaking; but he, in his valour and anger, will
not accept it, and says that he alone will suffice to rescue his wife,
even though she were imprisoned deep in the centre of the earth, and
with this he retires to arm himself and set out on his journey at
once. Now let your worships turn your eyes to that tower that appears
there, which is supposed to be one of the towers of the alcazar of
Saragossa, now called the Aljaferia; that lady who appears on that
balcony dressed in Moorish fashion is the peerless Melisendra, for
many a time she used to gaze from thence upon the road to France, and
seek consolation in her captivity by thinking of Paris and her
husband. Observe, too, a new incident which now occurs, such as,
perhaps, never was seen. Do you not see that Moor, who silently and
stealthily, with his finger on his lip, approaches Melisendra from
behind? Observe now how he prints a kiss upon her lips, and what a
hurry she is in to spit, and wipe them with the white sleeve of her
smock, and how she bewails herself, and tears her fair hair as though
it were to blame for the wrong. Observe, too, that the stately Moor
who is in that corridor is King Marsilio of Sansuena, who, having seen
the Moor's insolence, at once orders him (though his kinsman and a
great favourite of his) to be seized and given two hundred lashes,
while carried through the streets of the city according to custom,
with criers going before him and officers of justice behind; and here
you see them come out to execute the sentence, although the offence
has been scarcely committed; for among the Moors there are no
indictments nor remands as with us." Here Don Quixote called out,
"Child, child, go straight on with your story, and don't run into
curves and slants, for to establish a fact clearly there is need of a
great deal of proof and confirmation;" and said Master Pedro from
within, "Boy, stick to your text and do as the gentleman bids you;
it's the best plan; keep to your plain song, and don't attempt
harmonies, for they are apt to break down from being over fine." "I
will," said the boy, and he went on to say, "This figure that you see
here on horseback, covered with a Gascon cloak, is Don Gaiferos
himself, whom his wife, now avenged of the insult of the amorous Moor,
and taking her stand on the balcony of the tower with a calmer and
more tranquil countenance, has perceived without recognising him; and
she addresses her husband, supposing him to be some traveller, and
holds with him all that conversation and colloquy in the ballad that
runs-- If you, sir knight, to France are bound, Oh! for Gaiferos ask--
which I do not repeat here because prolixity begets disgust; suffice
it to observe how Don Gaiferos discovers himself, and that by her
joyful gestures Melisendra shows us she has recognised him; and what
is more, we now see she lowers herself from the balcony to place
herself on the haunches of her good husband's horse. But ah! unhappy
lady, the edge of her petticoat has caught on one of the bars of the
balcony and she is left hanging in the air, unable to reach the
ground. But you see how compassionate heaven sends aid in our sorest
need; Don Gaiferos advances, and without minding whether the rich
petticoat is torn or not, he seizes her and by force brings her to the
ground, and then with one jerk places her on the haunches of his
horse, astraddle like a man, and bids her hold on tight and clasp her
arms round his neck, crossing them on his breast so as not to fall,
for the lady Melisendra was not used to that style of riding. You see,
too, how the neighing of the horse shows his satisfaction with the
gallant and beautiful burden he bears in his lord and lady. You see
how they wheel round and quit the city, and in joy and gladness take
the road to Paris. Go in peace, O peerless pair of true lovers! May
you reach your longed-for fatherland in safety, and may fortune
interpose no impediment to your prosperous journey; may the eyes of
your friends and kinsmen behold you enjoying in peace and tranquillity
the remaining days of your life--and that they may be as many as those
of Nestor!" Here Master Pedro called out again and said, "Simplicity,
boy! None of your high flights; all affectation is bad." The
interpreter made no answer, but went on to say, "There was no want of
idle eyes, that see everything, to see Melisendra come down and mount,
and word was brought to King Marsilio, who at once gave orders to
sound the alarm; and see what a stir there is, and how the city is
drowned with the sound of the bells pealing in the towers of all the
mosques." "Nay, nay," said Don Quixote at this; "on that point of the
bells Master Pedro is very inaccurate, for bells are not in use among
the Moors; only kettledrums, and a kind of small trumpet somewhat like
our clarion; to ring bells this way in Sansuena is unquestionably a
great absurdity." On hearing this, Master Pedro stopped ringing, and
said, "Don't look into trifles, Senor Don Quixote, or want to have
things up to a pitch of perfection that is out of reach. Are there not
almost every day a thousand comedies represented all round us full of
thousands of inaccuracies and absurdities, and, for all that, they
have a successful run, and are listened to not only with applause, but
with admiration and all the rest of it? Go on, boy, and don't mind;
for so long as I fill my pouch, no matter if I show as many
inaccuracies as there are motes in a sunbeam." "True enough," said Don
Quixote; and the boy went on: "See what a numerous and glittering
crowd of horsemen issues from the city in pursuit of the two faithful
lovers, what a blowing of trumpets there is, what sounding of horns,
what beating of drums and tabors; I fear me they will overtake them
and bring them back tied to the tail of their own horse, which would
be a dreadful sight." Don Quixote, however, seeing such a swarm of
Moors and hearing such a din, thought it would be right to aid the
fugitives, and standing up he exclaimed in a loud voice, "Never, while
I live, will I permit foul play to be practised in my presence on such
a famous knight and fearless lover as Don Gaiferos. Halt! ill-born
rabble, follow him not nor pursue him, or ye will have to reckon with
me in battle!" and suiting the action to the word, he drew his sword,
and with one bound placed himself close to the show, and with
unexampled rapidity and fury began to shower down blows on the puppet
troop of Moors, knocking over some, decapitating others, maiming this
one and demolishing that; and among many more he delivered one down
stroke which, if Master Pedro had not ducked, made himself small, and
got out of the way, would have sliced off his head as easily as if it
had been made of almond-paste. Master Pedro kept shouting, "Hold hard!
Senor Don Quixote! can't you see they're not real Moors you're
knocking down and killing and destroying, but only little pasteboard
figures! Look--sinner that I am!--how you're wrecking and ruining all
that I'm worth!" But in spite of this, Don Quixote did not leave off
discharging a continuous rain of cuts, slashes, downstrokes, and
backstrokes, and at length, in less than the space of two credos, he
brought the whole show to the ground, with all its fittings and
figures shivered and knocked to pieces, King Marsilio badly wounded,
and the Emperor Charlemagne with his crown and head split in two. The
whole audience was thrown into confusion, the ape fled to the roof of
the inn, the cousin was frightened, and even Sancho Panza himself was
in mighty fear, for, as he swore after the storm was over, he had
never seen his master in such a furious passion. The complete
destruction of the show being thus accomplished, Don Quixote became a
little calmer, said, "I wish I had here before me now all those who do
not or will not believe how useful knights-errant are in the world;
just think, if I had not been here present, what would have become of
the brave Don Gaiferos and the fair Melisendra! Depend upon it, by
this time those dogs would have overtaken them and inflicted some
outrage upon them. So, then, long live knight-errantry beyond
everything living on earth this day!" "Let it live, and welcome," said
Master Pedro at this in a feeble voice, "and let me die, for I am so
unfortunate that I can say with King Don Rodrigo-- Yesterday was I
lord of Spain To-day I've not a turret left That I may call mine own.
Not half an hour, nay, barely a minute ago, I saw myself lord of kings
and emperors, with my stables filled with countless horses, and my
trunks and bags with gay dresses unnumbered; and now I find myself
ruined and laid low, destitute and a beggar, and above all without my
ape, for, by my faith, my teeth will have to sweat for it before I
have him caught; and all through the reckless fury of sir knight here,
who, they say, protects the fatherless, and rights wrongs, and does
other charitable deeds; but whose generous intentions have been found
wanting in my case only, blessed and praised be the highest heavens!
Verily, knight of the rueful figure he must be to have disfigured
mine." Sancho Panza was touched by Master Pedro's words, and said to
him, "Don't weep and lament, Master Pedro; you break my heart; let me
tell you my master, Don Quixote, is so catholic and scrupulous a
Christian that, if he can make out that he has done you any wrong, he
will own it, and be willing to pay for it and make it good, and
something over and above." "Only let Senor Don Quixote pay me for some
part of the work he has destroyed," said Master Pedro, "and I would be
content, and his worship would ease his conscience, for he cannot be
saved who keeps what is another's against the owner's will, and makes
no restitution." "That is true," said Don Quixote; "but my squire
values them at the rate he says, as having been given me by the person
who gave them." Roque Guinart ordered them to be restored at once; and
making his men fall in in line he directed all the clothing,
jewellery, and money that they had taken since the last distribution
to be produced; and making a hasty valuation, and reducing what could
not be divided into money, he made shares for the whole band so
equitably and carefully, that in no case did he exceed or fall short
of strict distributive justice. When this had been done, and all left
satisfied, Roque observed to Don Quixote, "If this scrupulous
exactness were not observed with these fellows there would be no
living with them." Upon this Sancho remarked, "From what I have seen
here, justice is such a good thing that there is no doing without it,
even among the thieves themselves." One of the squires heard this, and
raising the butt-end of his harquebuss would no doubt have broken
Sancho's head with it had not Roque Guinart called out to him to hold
his hand. Sancho was frightened out of his wits, and vowed not to open
his lips so long as he was in the company of these people. At this
instant one or two of those squires who were posted as sentinels on
the roads, to watch who came along them and report what passed to
their chief, came up and said, "Senor, there is a great troop of
people not far off coming along the road to Barcelona." To which Roque
replied, "Hast thou made out whether they are of the sort that are
after us, or of the sort we are after?" "The sort we are after," said
the squire. "Well then, away with you all," said Roque, "and bring
them here to me at once without letting one of them escape." They
obeyed, and Don Quixote, Sancho, and Roque, left by themselves, waited
to see what the squires brought, and while they were waiting Roque
said to Don Quixote, "It must seem a strange sort of life to Senor Don
Quixote, this of ours, strange adventures, strange incidents, and all
full of danger; and I do not wonder that it should seem so, for in
truth I must own there is no mode of life more restless or anxious
than ours. What led me into it was a certain thirst for vengeance,
which is strong enough to disturb the quietest hearts. I am by nature
tender-hearted and kindly, but, as I said, the desire to revenge
myself for a wrong that was done me so overturns all my better
impulses that I keep on in this way of life in spite of what
conscience tells me; and as one depth calls to another, and one sin to
another sin, revenges have linked themselves together, and I have
taken upon myself not only my own but those of others: it pleases God,
however, that, though I see myself in this maze of entanglements, I do
not lose all hope of escaping from it and reaching a safe port." Don
Quixote was amazed to hear Roque utter such excellent and just
sentiments, for he did not think that among those who followed such
trades as robbing, murdering, and waylaying, there could be anyone
capable of a virtuous thought, and he said in reply, "Senor Roque, the
beginning of health lies in knowing the disease and in the sick man's
willingness to take the medicines which the physician prescribes; you
are sick, you know what ails you, and heaven, or more properly
speaking God, who is our physician, will administer medicines that
will cure you, and cure gradually, and not of a sudden or by a
miracle; besides, sinners of discernment are nearer amendment than
those who are fools; and as your worship has shown good sense in your
remarks, all you have to do is to keep up a good heart and trust that
the weakness of your conscience will be strengthened. And if you have
any desire to shorten the journey and put yourself easily in the way
of salvation, come with me, and I will show you how to become a
knight-errant, a calling wherein so many hardships and mishaps are
encountered that if they be taken as penances they will lodge you in
heaven in a trice." Roque laughed at Don Quixote's exhortation, and
changing the conversation he related the tragic affair of Claudia
Jeronima, at which Sancho was extremely grieved; for he had not found
the young woman's beauty, boldness, and spirit at all amiss. And now
the squires despatched to make the prize came up, bringing with them
two gentlemen on horseback, two pilgrims on foot, and a coach full of
women with some six servants on foot and on horseback in attendance on
them, and a couple of muleteers whom the gentlemen had with them. The
squires made a ring round them, both victors and vanquished
maintaining profound silence, waiting for the great Roque Guinart to
speak. He asked the gentlemen who they were, whither they were going,
and what money they carried with them; "Senor," replied one of them,
"we are two captains of Spanish infantry; our companies are at Naples,
and we are on our way to embark in four galleys which they say are at
Barcelona under orders for Sicily; and we have about two or three
hundred crowns, with which we are, according to our notions, rich and
contented, for a soldier's poverty does not allow a more extensive
hoard." Roque asked the pilgrims the same questions he had put to the
captains, and was answered that they were going to take ship for Rome,
and that between them they might have about sixty reals. He asked also
who was in the coach, whither they were bound and what money they had,
and one of the men on horseback replied, "The persons in the coach are
my lady Dona Guiomar de Quinones, wife of the regent of the Vicaria at
Naples, her little daughter, a handmaid and a duenna; we six servants
are in attendance upon her, and the money amounts to six hundred
crowns." "So then," said Roque Guinart, "we have got here nine hundred
crowns and sixty reals; my soldiers must number some sixty; see how
much there falls to each, for I am a bad arithmetician." As soon as
the robbers heard this they raised a shout of "Long life to Roque
Guinart, in spite of the lladres that seek his ruin!" The captains
showed plainly the concern they felt, the regent's lady was downcast,
and the pilgrims did not at all enjoy seeing their property
confiscated. Roque kept them in suspense in this way for a while; but
he had no desire to prolong their distress, which might be seen a
bowshot off, and turning to the captains he said, "Sirs, will your
worships be pleased of your courtesy to lend me sixty crowns, and her
ladyship the regent's wife eighty, to satisfy this band that follows
me, for 'it is by his singing the abbot gets his dinner;' and then you
may at once proceed on your journey, free and unhindered, with a
safe-conduct which I shall give you, so that if you come across any
other bands of mine that I have scattered in these parts, they may do
you no harm; for I have no intention of doing injury to soldiers, or
to any woman, especially one of quality." Profuse and hearty were the
expressions of gratitude with which the captains thanked Roque for his
courtesy and generosity; for such they regarded his leaving them their
own money. Senora Dona Guiomar de Quinones wanted to throw herself out
of the coach to kiss the feet and hands of the great Roque, but he
would not suffer it on any account; so far from that, he begged her
pardon for the wrong he had done her under pressure of the inexorable
necessities of his unfortunate calling. The regent's lady ordered one
of her servants to give the eighty crowns that had been assessed as
her share at once, for the captains had already paid down their sixty.
The pilgrims were about to give up the whole of their little hoard,
but Roque bade them keep quiet, and turning to his men he said, "Of
these crowns two fall to each man and twenty remain over; let ten be
given to these pilgrims, and the other ten to this worthy squire that
he may be able to speak favourably of this adventure;" and then having
writing materials, with which he always went provided, brought to him,
he gave them in writing a safe-conduct to the leaders of his bands;
and bidding them farewell let them go free and filled with admiration
at his magnanimity, his generous disposition, and his unusual conduct,
and inclined to regard him as an Alexander the Great rather than a
notorious robber. One of the squires observed in his mixture of Gascon
and Catalan, "This captain of ours would make a better friar than
highwayman; if he wants to be so generous another time, let it be with
his own property and not ours." The unlucky wight did not speak so low
but that Roque overheard him, and drawing his sword almost split his
head in two, saying, "That is the way I punish impudent saucy
fellows." They were all taken aback, and not one of them dared to
utter a word, such deference did they pay him. Roque then withdrew to
one side and wrote a letter to a friend of his at Barcelona, telling
him that the famous Don Quixote of La Mancha, of whom it will be said,
as was said of the other, that if he did not achieve great things, he
died in attempting them; and if I am not repulsed or rejected by my
Dulcinea, it is enough for me, as I have said, to be absent from her.
And so, now to business; come to my memory ye deeds of Amadis, and
show me how I am to serve him; but what amazes me and I cannot
understand is why my wife and daughter should have gone to Barbary
rather than to France, where they could live as Christians." To this
Sancho replied, "Remember, Ricote, that may not have been open to
them, for Juan Tiopieyo thy wife's brother took them, and being a true
Moor he went where he could go most easily; and another thing I can
tell thee, it is my belief thou art going in vain to look for what
thou hast left buried, for we heard they took from thy brother-in-law
and thy wife a great quantity of pearls and money in gold which they
brought to be passed." "That may be," said Ricote; "but I know they
did not touch my hoard, for I did not tell them where it was, for fear
of accidents; and so, if thou wilt come with me, Sancho, and help me
to take it away and conceal it, I will give thee two hundred crowns
wherewith thou mayest relieve thy necessities, and, as thou knowest, I
know they are many." "I would do it," said Sancho; "but I am not at
all covetous, for I gave up an office this morning in which, if I was,
I might have made the walls of my house of gold and dined off silver
plates before six months were over; and so for this reason, and
because I feel I would be guilty of treason to my king if I helped his
enemies, I would not go with thee if instead of promising me two
hundred crowns thou wert to give me four hundred here in hand." "And
what office is this thou hast given up, Sancho?" asked Ricote. "I have
given up being governor of an island," said Sancho, "and such a one,
faith, as you won't find the like of easily." "And where is this
island?" said Ricote. "Where?" said Sancho; "two leagues from here,
and it is called the island of Barataria." "Nonsense! Sancho," said
Ricote; "islands are away out in the sea; there are no islands on the
mainland." "What? No islands!" said Sancho; "I tell thee, friend
Ricote, I left it this morning, and yesterday I was governing there as
I pleased like a sagittarius; but for all that I gave it up, for it
seemed to me a dangerous office, a governor's." "And what hast thou
gained by the government?" asked Ricote. "I have gained," said Sancho,
"the knowledge that I am no good for governing, unless it is a drove
of cattle, and that the riches that are to be got by these governments
are got at the cost of one's rest and sleep, ay and even one's food;
for in islands the governors must eat little, especially if they have
doctors to look after their health." "I don't understand thee,
Sancho," said Ricote; "but it seems to me all nonsense thou art
talking. Who would give thee islands to govern? Is there any scarcity
in the world of cleverer men than thou art for governors? Hold thy
peace, Sancho, and come back to thy senses, and consider whether thou
wilt come with me as I said to help me to take away treasure I left
buried (for indeed it may be called a treasure, it is so large), and I
will give thee wherewithal to keep thee, as I told thee." "And I have
told thee already, Ricote, that I will not," said Sancho; "let it
content thee that by me thou shalt not be betrayed, and go thy way in
God's name and let me go mine; for I know that well-gotten gain may be
lost, but ill-gotten gain is lost, itself and its owner likewise." "I
will not press thee, Sancho," said Ricote; "but tell me, wert thou in
our village when my wife and daughter and brother-in-law left it?" "I
was so," said Sancho; "and I can tell thee thy daughter left it
looking so lovely that all the village turned out to see her, and
everybody said she was the fairest creature in the world. She wept as
she went, and embraced all her friends and acquaintances and those who
came out to see her, and she begged them all to commend her to God and
Our Lady his mother, and this in such a touching way that it made me
weep myself, though I'm not much given to tears commonly; and, faith,
many a one would have liked to hide her, or go out and carry her off
on the road; but the fear of going against the king's command kept
them back. The one who showed himself most moved was Don Pedro
Gregorio, the rich young heir thou knowest of, and they say he was
deep in love with her; and since she left he has not been seen in our
village again, and we all suspect he has gone after her to steal her
away, but so far nothing has been heard of it." "I always had a
suspicion that gentleman had a passion for my daughter," said Ricote;
"but as I felt sure of my Ricota's virtue it gave me no uneasiness to
know that he loved her; for thou must have heard it said, Sancho, that
the Morisco women seldom or never engage in amours with the old
Christians; and my daughter, who I fancy thought more of being a
Christian than of lovemaking, would not trouble herself about the
attentions of this heir." "God grant it," said Sancho, "for it would
be a bad business for both of them; but now let me be off, friend
Ricote, for I want to reach where my master Don Quixote is to-night."
"God be with thee, brother Sancho," said Ricote; "my comrades are
beginning to stir, and it is time, too, for us to continue our
journey;" and then they both embraced, and Sancho mounted Dapple, and
Ricote leant upon his staff, and so they parted. CHAPTER LV. OF WHAT
BEFELL SANCHO ON THE ROAD, AND OTHER THINGS THAT CANNOT BE SURPASSED
The length of time he delayed with Ricote prevented Sancho from
reaching the duke's castle that day, though he was within half a
league of it when night, somewhat dark and cloudy, overtook him. This,
however, as it was summer time, did not give him much uneasiness, and
he turned aside out of the road intending to wait for morning; but his
ill luck and hard fate so willed it that as he was searching about for
a place to make himself as comfortable as possible, he and Dapple fell
into a deep dark hole that lay among some very old buildings. As he
fell he commended himself with all his heart to God, fancying he was
not going to stop until he reached the depths of the bottomless pit;
but it did not turn out so, for at little more than thrice a man's
height Dapple touched bottom, and he found himself sitting on him
without having received any hurt or damage whatever. He felt himself
all over and held his breath to try whether he was quite sound or had
a hole made in him anywhere, and finding himself all right and whole
and in perfect health he was profuse in his thanks to God our Lord for
the mercy that had been shown him, for he made sure he had been broken
into a thousand pieces. He also felt along the sides of the pit with
his hands to see if it were possible to get out of it without help,
but he found they were quite smooth and afforded no hold anywhere, at
which he was greatly distressed, especially when he heard how
pathetically and dolefully Dapple was bemoaning himself, and no wonder
he complained, nor was it from ill-temper, for in truth he was not in
a very good case. "Alas," said Sancho, "what unexpected accidents
happen at every step to those who live in this miserable world! Who
would have said that one who saw himself yesterday sitting on a
throne, governor of an island, giving orders to his servants and his
vassals, would see himself to-day buried in a pit without a soul to
help him, or servant or vassal to come to his relief? Here must we
perish with hunger, my ass and myself, if indeed we don't die first,
he of his bruises and injuries, and I of grief and sorrow. At any rate
I'll not be as lucky as my master Don Quixote of La Mancha, when he
went down into the cave of that enchanted Montesinos, where he found
people to make more of him than if he had been in his own house; for
it seems he came in for a table laid out and a bed ready made. There
he saw fair and pleasant visions, but here I'll see, I imagine, toads
and adders. Unlucky wretch that I am, what an end my follies and
fancies have come to! They'll take up my bones out of this, when it is
heaven's will that I'm found, picked clean, white and polished, and my
good Dapple's with them, and by that, perhaps, it will be found out
who we are, at least by such as have heard that Sancho Panza never
separated from his ass, nor his ass from Sancho Panza. Unlucky
wretches, I say again, that our hard fate should not let us die in our
own country and among our own people, where if there was no help for
our misfortune, at any rate there would be some one to grieve for it
and to close our eyes as we passed away! O comrade and friend, how ill
have I repaid thy faithful services! Forgive me, and entreat Fortune,
as well as thou canst, to deliver us out of this miserable strait we
are both in; and I promise to put a crown of laurel on thy head, and
make thee look like a poet laureate, and give thee double feeds." In
this strain did Sancho bewail himself, and his ass listened to him,
but answered him never a word, such was the distress and anguish the
poor beast found himself in. At length, after a night spent in bitter
moanings and lamentations, day came, and by its light Sancho perceived
that it was wholly impossible to escape out of that pit without help,
and he fell to bemoaning his fate and uttering loud shouts to find out
if there was anyone within hearing; but all his shouting was only
crying in the wilderness, for there was not a soul anywhere in the
neighbourhood to hear him, and then at last he gave himself up for
dead. Dapple was lying on his back, and Sancho helped him to his feet,
which he was scarcely able to keep; and then taking a piece of bread
out of his alforjas which had shared their fortunes in the fall, he
gave it to the ass, to whom it was not unwelcome, saying to him as if
he understood him, "With bread all sorrows are less." And now he
perceived on one side of the pit a hole large enough to admit a person
if he stooped and squeezed himself into a small compass. Sancho made
for it, and entered it by creeping, and found it wide and spacious on
the inside, which he was able to see as a ray of sunlight that
penetrated what might be called the roof showed it all plainly. He
observed too that it opened and widened out into another spacious
cavity; seeing which he made his way back to where the ass was, and
with a stone began to pick away the clay from the hole until in a
short time he had made room for the beast to pass easily, and this
accomplished, taking him by the halter, he proceeded to traverse the
cavern to see if there was any outlet at the other end. He advanced,
sometimes in the dark, sometimes without light, but never without
fear; "God Almighty help me!" said he to himself; "this that is a
misadventure to me would make a good adventure for my master Don
Quixote. He would have been sure to take these depths and dungeons for
flowery gardens or the palaces of Galiana, and would have counted upon
issuing out of this darkness and imprisonment into some blooming
meadow; but I, unlucky that I am, hopeless and spiritless, expect at
every step another pit deeper than the first to open under my feet and
swallow me up for good; 'welcome evil, if thou comest alone.'" In this
way and with these reflections he seemed to himself to have travelled
rather more than half a league, when at last he perceived a dim light
that looked like daylight and found its way in on one side, showing
that this road, which appeared to him the road to the other world, led
to some opening. Here Cide Hamete leaves him, and returns to Don
Quixote, who in high spirits and satisfaction was looking forward to
the day fixed for the battle he was to fight with him who had robbed
Dona Rodriguez's daughter of her honour, for whom he hoped to obtain
satisfaction for the wrong and injury shamefully done to her. It came
to pass, then, that having sallied forth one morning to practise and
exercise himself in what he would have to do in the encounter he
expected to find himself engaged in the next day, as he was putting
Rocinante through his paces or pressing him to the charge, he brought
his feet so close to a pit that but for reining him in tightly it
would have been impossible for him to avoid falling into it. He pulled
him up, however, without a fall, and coming a little closer examined
the hole without dismounting; but as he was looking at it he heard
loud cries proceeding from it, and by listening attentively was able
to make out that he who uttered them was saying, "Ho, above there! is
there any Christian that hears me, or any charitable gentleman that
will take pity on a sinner buried alive, on an unfortunate disgoverned
governor?" It struck Don Quixote that it was the voice of Sancho Panza
he heard, whereat he was taken aback and amazed, and raising his own
voice as much as he could, he cried out, "Who is below there? Who is
that complaining?" "Who should be here, or who should complain," was
the answer, "but the forlorn Sancho Panza, for his sins and for his
ill-luck governor of the island of Barataria, squire that was to the
famous knight Don Quixote of La Mancha?" When Don Quixote heard this
his amazement was redoubled and his perturbation grew greater than
ever, for it suggested itself to his mind that Sancho must be dead,
and that his soul was in torment down there; and carried away by this
idea he exclaimed, "I conjure thee by everything that as a Catholic
Christian I can conjure thee by, tell me who thou art; and if thou art
a soul in torment, tell me what thou wouldst have me do for thee; for
as my profession is to give aid and succour to those that need it in
this world, it will also extend to aiding and succouring the
distressed of the other, who cannot help themselves." "In that case,"
answered the voice, "your worship who speaks to me must be my master
Don Quixote of La Mancha; nay, from the tone of the voice it is plain
it can be nobody else." "Don Quixote I am," replied Don Quixote, "he
whose profession it is to aid and succour the living and the dead in
their necessities; wherefore tell me who thou art, for thou art
keeping me in suspense; because, if thou art my squire Sancho Panza,
and art dead, since the devils have not carried thee off, and thou art
by God's mercy in purgatory, our holy mother the Roman Catholic Church
has intercessory means sufficient to release thee from the pains thou
art in; and I for my part will plead with her to that end, so far as
my substance will go; without further delay, therefore, declare
thyself, and tell me who thou art." "By all that's good," was the
answer, "and by the birth of whomsoever your worship chooses, I swear,
Senor Don Quixote of La Mancha, that I am your squire Sancho Panza,
and that I have never died all my life; but that, having given up my
government for reasons that would require more time to explain, I fell
last night into this pit where I am now, and Dapple is witness and
won't let me lie, for more by token he is here with me." Nor was this
all; one would have fancied the ass understood what Sancho said,
because that moment he began to bray so loudly that the whole cave
rang again. "Famous testimony!" exclaimed Don Quixote; "I know that
bray as well as if I was its mother, and thy voice too, my Sancho.
Wait while I go to the duke's castle, which is close by, and I will
bring some one to take thee out of this pit into which thy sins no
doubt have brought thee." "Go, your worship," said Sancho, "and come
back quick for God's sake; for I cannot bear being buried alive any
longer, and I'm dying of fear." Don Quixote left him, and hastened to
the castle to tell the duke and duchess what had happened Sancho, and
they were not a little astonished at it; they could easily understand
his having fallen, from the confirmatory circumstance of the cave
which had been in existence there from time immemorial; but they could
not imagine how he had quitted the government without their receiving
any intimation of his coming. To be brief, they fetched ropes and
tackle, as the saying is, and by dint of many hands and much labour
they drew up Dapple and Sancho Panza out of the darkness into the
light of day. A student who saw him remarked, "That's the way all bad
governors should come out of their governments, as this sinner comes
out of the depths of the pit, dead with hunger, pale, and I suppose
without a farthing." Sancho overheard him and said, "It is eight or
ten days, brother growler, since I entered upon the government of the
island they gave me, and all that time I never had a bellyful of
victuals, no not for an hour; doctors persecuted me and enemies
crushed my bones; nor had I any opportunity of taking bribes or
levying taxes; and if that be the case, as it is, I don't deserve, I
think, to come out in this fashion; but 'man proposes and God
disposes;' and God knows what is best, and what suits each one best;
and 'as the occasion, so the behaviour;' and 'let nobody say "I won't
drink of this water;"' and 'where one thinks there are flitches, there
are no pegs;' God knows my meaning and that's enough; I say no more,
though I could." "Be not angry or annoyed at what thou hearest,
Sancho," said Don Quixote, "or there will never be an end of it; keep
a safe conscience and let them say what they like; for trying to stop
slanderers' tongues is like trying to put gates to the open plain. If
a governor comes out of his government rich, they say he has been a
thief; and if he comes out poor, that he has been a noodle and a
blockhead." "They'll be pretty sure this time," said Sancho, "to set
me down for a fool rather than a thief." Thus talking, and surrounded
by boys and a crowd of people, they reached the castle, where in one
of the corridors the duke and duchess stood waiting for them; but
Sancho would not go up to see the duke until he had first put up
Dapple in the stable, for he said he had passed a very bad night in
his last quarters; then he went upstairs to see his lord and lady, and
kneeling before them he said, "Because it was your highnesses'
pleasure, not because of any desert of my own, I went to govern your
island of Barataria, which 'I entered naked, and naked I find myself;
I neither lose nor gain.' Whether I have governed well or ill, I have
had witnesses who will say what they think fit. I have answered
questions, I have decided causes, and always dying of hunger, for
Doctor Pedro Recio of Tirteafuera, the island and governor doctor,
would have it so. Enemies attacked us by night and put us in a great
quandary, but the people of the island say they came off safe and
victorious by the might of my arm; and may God give them as much
health as there's truth in what they say. In short, during that time I
have weighed the cares and responsibilities governing brings with it,
and by my reckoning I find my shoulders can't bear them, nor are they
a load for my loins or arrows for my quiver; and so, before the
government threw me over I preferred to throw the government over; and
yesterday morning I left the island as I found it, with the same
streets, houses, and roofs it had when I entered it. I asked no loan
of anybody, nor did I try to fill my pocket; and though I meant to
make some useful laws, I made hardly any, as I was afraid they would
not be kept; for in that case it comes to the same thing to make them
or not to make them. I quitted the island, as I said, without any
escort except my ass; I fell into a pit, I pushed on through it, until
this morning by the light of the sun I saw an outlet, but not so easy
a one but that, had not heaven sent me my master Don Quixote, I'd have
stayed there till the end of the world. So now my lord and lady duke
and duchess, here is your governor Sancho Panza, who in the bare ten
days he has held the government has come by the knowledge that he
would not give anything to be governor, not to say of an island, but
of the whole world; and that point being settled, kissing your
worships' feet, and imitating the game of the boys when they say,
'leap thou, and give me one,' I take a leap out of the government and
pass into the service of my master Don Quixote; for after all, though
in it I eat my bread in fear and trembling, at any rate I take my
fill; and for my part, so long as I'm full, it's all alike to me
whether it's with carrots or with partridges." Here Sancho brought his
long speech to an end, Don Quixote having been the whole time in dread
of his uttering a host of absurdities; and when he found him leave off
with so few, he thanked heaven in his heart. The duke embraced Sancho
and told him he was heartily sorry he had given up the government so
soon, but that he would see that he was provided with some other post
on his estate less onerous and more profitable. The duchess also
embraced him, and gave orders that he should be taken good care of, as
it was plain to see he had been badly treated and worse bruised.
CHAPTER LVI. OF THE PRODIGIOUS AND UNPARALLELED BATTLE THAT TOOK PLACE
BETWEEN DON QUIXOTE OF LA MANCHA AND THE LACQUEY TOSILOS IN DEFENCE OF
THE DAUGHTER OF DONA RODRIGUEZ CHAPTER LVII WHICH TREATS OF HOW DON
QUIXOTE TOOK LEAVE OF THE DUKE, AND OF WHAT FOLLOWED WITH THE WITTY
AND IMPUDENT ALTISIDORA, ONE OF THE DUCHESS'S DAMSELS Don Quixote now
felt it right to quit a life of such idleness as he was leading in the
castle; for he fancied that he was making himself sorely missed by
suffering himself to remain shut up and inactive amid the countless
luxuries and enjoyments his hosts lavished upon him as a knight, and
he felt too that he would have to render a strict account to heaven of
that indolence and seclusion; and so one day he asked the duke and
duchess to grant him permission to take his departure. They gave it,
showing at the same time that they were very sorry he was leaving
them. The duchess gave his wife's letters to Sancho Panza, who shed
tears over them, saying, "Who would have thought that such grand hopes
as the news of my government bred in my wife Teresa Panza's breast
would end in my going back now to the vagabond adventures of my master
Don Quixote of La Mancha? Still I'm glad to see my Teresa behaved as
she ought in sending the acorns, for if she had not sent them I'd have
been sorry, and she'd have shown herself ungrateful. It is a comfort
to me that they can't call that present a bribe; for I had got the
government already when she sent them, and it's but reasonable that
those who have had a good turn done them should show their gratitude,
if it's only with a trifle. After all I went into the government
naked, and I come out of it naked; so I can say with a safe
conscience--and that's no small matter--'naked I was born, naked I
find myself, I neither lose nor gain; nay, while I see myself put into
a book and passed on from hand to hand over the world, I don't care a
fig, let them say what they like of me." "That, Sancho," returned Don
Quixote, "reminds me of what happened to a famous poet of our own day,
who, having written a bitter satire against all the courtesan ladies,
did not insert or name in it a certain lady of whom it was
questionable whether she was one or not. She, seeing she was not in
the list of the poet, asked him what he had seen in her that he did
not include her in the number of the others, telling him he must add
to his satire and put her in the new part, or else look out for the
consequences. The poet did as she bade him, and left her without a
shred of reputation, and she was satisfied by getting fame though it
was infamy. In keeping with this is what they relate of that shepherd
who set fire to the famous temple of Diana, by repute one of the seven
wonders of the world, and burned it with the sole object of making his
name live in after ages; and, though it was forbidden to name him, or
mention his name by word of mouth or in writing, lest the object of
his ambition should be attained, nevertheless it became known that he
was called Erostratus. And something of the same sort is what happened
in the case of the great emperor Charles V and a gentleman in Rome.
The emperor was anxious to see that famous temple of the Rotunda,
called in ancient times the temple 'of all the gods,' but now-a-days,
by a better nomenclature, 'of all the saints,' which is the best
preserved building of all those of pagan construction in Rome, and the
one which best sustains the reputation of mighty works and
magnificence of its founders. It is in the form of a half orange, of
enormous dimensions, and well lighted, though no light penetrates it
save that which is admitted by a window, or rather round skylight, at
the top; and it was from this that the emperor examined the building.
A Roman gentleman stood by his side and explained to him the skilful
construction and ingenuity of the vast fabric and its wonderful
architecture, and when they had left the skylight he said to the
emperor, 'A thousand times, your Sacred Majesty, the impulse came upon
me to seize your Majesty in my arms and fling myself down from yonder
skylight, so as to leave behind me in the world a name that would last
for ever.' 'I am thankful to you for not carrying such an evil thought
into effect,' said the emperor, 'and I shall give you no opportunity
in future of again putting your loyalty to the test; and I therefore
forbid you ever to speak to me or to be where I am; and he followed up
these words by bestowing a liberal bounty upon him. My meaning is,
Sancho, that the desire of acquiring fame is a very powerful motive.
What, thinkest thou, was it that flung Horatius in full armour down
from the bridge into the depths of the Tiber? What burned the hand and
arm of Mutius? What impelled Curtius to plunge into the deep burning
gulf that opened in the midst of Rome? What, in opposition to all the
omens that declared against him, made Julius Caesar cross the Rubicon?
And to come to more modern examples, what scuttled the ships, and left
stranded and cut off the gallant Spaniards under the command of the
most courteous Cortes in the New World? All these and a variety of
other great exploits are, were and will be, the work of fame that
mortals desire as a reward and a portion of the immortality their
famous deeds deserve; though we Catholic Christians and knights-errant
look more to that future glory that is everlasting in the ethereal
regions of heaven than to the vanity of the fame that is to be
acquired in this present transitory life; a fame that, however long it
may last, must after all end with the world itself, which has its own
appointed end. So that, O Sancho, in what we do we must not overpass
the bounds which the Christian religion we profess has assigned to us.
We have to slay pride in giants, envy by generosity and nobleness of
heart, anger by calmness of demeanour and equanimity, gluttony and
sloth by the spareness of our diet and the length of our vigils, lust
and lewdness by the loyalty we preserve to those whom we have made the
mistresses of our thoughts, indolence by traversing the world in all
directions seeking opportunities of making ourselves, besides
Christians, famous knights. Such, Sancho, are the means by which we
reach those extremes of praise that fair fame carries with it." "All
that your worship has said so far," said Sancho, "I have understood
quite well; but still I would be glad if your worship would make
Master Pedro ask his ape whether what happened your worship in the
cave of Montesinos is true; for, begging your worship's pardon, I, for
my part, take it to have been all flam and lies, or at any rate
something you dreamt." "That may be," replied Don Quixote; "however, I
will do what you suggest; though I have my own scruples about it." At
this point Master Pedro came up in quest of Don Quixote, to tell him
the show was now ready and to come and see it, for it was worth
seeing. Don Quixote explained his wish, and begged him to ask his ape
at once to tell him whether certain things which had happened to him
in the cave of Montesinos were dreams or realities, for to him they
appeared to partake of both. Upon this Master Pedro, without
answering, went back to fetch the ape, and, having placed it in front
of Don Quixote and Sancho, said: "See here, senor ape, this gentleman
wishes to know whether certain things which happened to him in the
cave called the cave of Montesinos were false or true." On his making
the usual sign the ape mounted on his left shoulder and seemed to
whisper in his ear, and Master Pedro said at once, "The ape says that
the things you saw or that happened to you in that cave are, part of
them false, part true; and that he only knows this and no more as
regards this question; but if your worship wishes to know more, on
Friday next he will answer all that may be asked him, for his virtue
is at present exhausted, and will not return to him till Friday, as he
has said." "Did I not say, senor," said Sancho, "that I could not
bring myself to believe that all your worship said about the
adventures in the cave was true, or even the half of it?" "The course
of events will tell, Sancho," replied Don Quixote; "time, that
discloses all things, leaves nothing that it does not drag into the
light of day, though it be buried in the bosom of the earth. But
enough of that for the present; let us go and see Master Pedro's show,
for I am sure there must be something novel in it." "Something!" said
Master Pedro; "this show of mine has sixty thousand novel things in
it; let me tell you, Senor Don Quixote, it is one of the
best-worth-seeing things in the world this day; but operibus credite
et non verbis, and now let's get to work, for it is growing late, and
we have a great deal to do and to say and show." Don Quixote and
Sancho obeyed him and went to where the show was already put up and
uncovered, set all around with lighted wax tapers which made it look
splendid and bright. When they came to it Master Pedro ensconced
himself inside it, for it was he who had to work the puppets, and a
boy, a servant of his, posted himself outside to act as showman and
explain the mysteries of the exhibition, having a wand in his hand to
point to the figures as they came out. And so, all who were in the inn
being arranged in front of the show, some of them standing, and Don
Quixote, Sancho, the page, and cousin, accommodated with the best
places, the interpreter began to say what he will hear or see who
reads or hears the next chapter. CHAPTER XXVI. WHEREIN IS CONTINUED
THE DROLL ADVENTURE OF THE PUPPET-SHOWMAN, TOGETHER WITH OTHER THINGS
IN TRUTH RIGHT GOOD All were silent, Tyrians and Trojans; I mean all
who were watching the show were hanging on the lips of the interpreter
of its wonders, when drums and trumpets were heard to sound inside it
and cannon to go off. The noise was soon over, and then the boy lifted
up his voice and said, "This true story which is here represented to
your worships is taken word for word from the French chronicles and
from the Spanish ballads that are in everybody's mouth, and in the
mouth of the boys about the streets. Its subject is the release by
Senor Don Gaiferos of his wife Melisendra, when a captive in Spain at
the hands of the Moors in the city of Sansuena, for so they called
then what is now called Saragossa; and there you may see how Don
Gaiferos is playing at the tables, just as they sing it-- At tables
playing Don Gaiferos sits, For Melisendra is forgotten now. And that
personage who appears there with a crown on his head and a sceptre in
his hand is the Emperor Charlemagne, the supposed father of
Melisendra, who, angered to see his son-in-law's inaction and
unconcern, comes in to chide him; and observe with what vehemence and
energy he chides him, so that you would fancy he was going to give him
half a dozen raps with his sceptre; and indeed there are authors who
say he did give them, and sound ones too; and after having said a
great deal to him about imperilling his honour by not effecting the
release of his wife, he said, so the tale runs, Enough I've said, see
to it now. Observe, too, how the emperor turns away, and leaves Don
Gaiferos fuming; and you see now how in a burst of anger, he flings
the table and the board far from him and calls in haste for his
armour, and asks his cousin Don Roland for the loan of his sword,
Durindana, and how Don Roland refuses to lend it, offering him his
company in the difficult enterprise he is undertaking; but he, in his
valour and anger, will not accept it, and says that he alone will
suffice to rescue his wife, even though she were imprisoned deep in
the centre of the earth, and with this he retires to arm himself and
set out on his journey at once. Now let your worships turn your eyes
to that tower that appears there, which is supposed to be one of the
towers of the alcazar of Saragossa, now called the Aljaferia; that
lady who appears on that balcony dressed in Moorish fashion is the
peerless Melisendra, for many a time she used to gaze from thence upon
the road to France, and seek consolation in her captivity by thinking
of Paris and her husband. Observe, too, a new incident which now
occurs, such as, perhaps, never was seen. Do you not see that Moor,
who silently and stealthily, with his finger on his lip, approaches
Melisendra from behind? Observe now how he prints a kiss upon her
lips, and what a hurry she is in to spit, and wipe them with the white
sleeve of her smock, and how she bewails herself, and tears her fair
hair as though it were to blame for the wrong. Observe, too, that the
stately Moor who is in that corridor is King Marsilio of Sansuena,
who, having seen the Moor's insolence, at once orders him (though his
kinsman and a great favourite of his) to be seized and given two
hundred lashes, while carried through the streets of the city
according to custom, with criers going before him and officers of
justice behind; and here you see them come out to execute the
sentence, although the offence has been scarcely committed; for among
the Moors there are no indictments nor remands as with us." Here Don
Quixote called out, "Child, child, go straight on with your story, and
don't run into curves and slants, for to establish a fact clearly
there is need of a great deal of proof and confirmation;" and said
Master Pedro from within, "Boy, stick to your text and do as the
gentleman bids you; it's the best plan; keep to your plain song, and
don't attempt harmonies, for they are apt to break down from being
over fine." "I will," said the boy, and he went on to say, "This
figure that you see here on horseback, covered with a Gascon cloak, is
Don Gaiferos himself, whom his wife, now avenged of the insult of the
amorous Moor, and taking her stand on the balcony of the tower with a
calmer and more tranquil countenance, has perceived without
recognising him; and she addresses her husband, supposing him to be
some traveller, and holds with him all that conversation and colloquy
in the ballad that runs-- If you, sir knight, to France are bound, Oh!
for Gaiferos ask-- which I do not repeat here because prolixity begets
disgust; suffice it to observe how Don Gaiferos discovers himself, and
that by her joyful gestures Melisendra shows us she has recognised
him; and what is more, we now see she lowers herself from the balcony
to place herself on the haunches of her good husband's horse. But ah!
unhappy lady, the edge of her petticoat has caught on one of the bars
of the balcony and she is left hanging in the air, unable to reach the
ground. But you see how compassionate heaven sends aid in our sorest
need; Don Gaiferos advances, and without minding whether the rich
petticoat is torn or not, he seizes her and by force brings her to the
ground, and then with one jerk places her on the haunches of his
horse, astraddle like a man, and bids her hold on tight and clasp her
arms round his neck, crossing them on his breast so as not to fall,
for the lady Melisendra was not used to that style of riding. You see,
too, how the neighing of the horse shows his satisfaction with the
gallant and beautiful burden he bears in his lord and lady. You see
how they wheel round and quit the city, and in joy and gladness take
the road to Paris. Go in peace, O peerless pair of true lovers! May
you reach your longed-for fatherland in safety, and may fortune
interpose no impediment to your prosperous journey; may the eyes of
your friends and kinsmen behold you enjoying in peace and tranquillity
the remaining days of your life--and that they may be as many as those
of Nestor!" Here Master Pedro called out again and said, "Simplicity,
boy! None of your high flights; all affectation is bad." The
interpreter made no answer, but went on to say, "There was no want of
idle eyes, that see everything, to see Melisendra come down and mount,
and word was brought to King Marsilio, who at once gave orders to
sound the alarm; and see what a stir there is, and how the city is
drowned with the sound of the bells pealing in the towers of all the
mosques." "Nay, nay," said Don Quixote at this; "on that point of the
bells Master Pedro is very inaccurate, for bells are not in use among
the Moors; only kettledrums, and a kind of small trumpet somewhat like
our clarion; to ring bells this way in Sansuena is unquestionably a
great absurdity." On hearing this, Master Pedro stopped ringing, and
said, "Don't look into trifles, Senor Don Quixote, or want to have
things up to a pitch of perfection that is out of reach. Are there not
almost every day a thousand comedies represented all round us full of
thousands of inaccuracies and absurdities, and, for all that, they
have a successful run, and are listened to not only with applause, but
with admiration and all the rest of it? Go on, boy, and don't mind;
for so long as I fill my pouch, no matter if I show as many
inaccuracies as there are motes in a sunbeam." "True enough," said Don
Quixote; and the boy went on: "See what a numerous and glittering
crowd of horsemen issues from the city in pursuit of the two faithful
lovers, what a blowing of trumpets there is, what sounding of horns,
what beating of drums and tabors; I fear me they will overtake them
and bring them back tied to the tail of their own horse, which would
be a dreadful sight." Don Quixote, however, seeing such a swarm of
Moors and hearing such a din, thought it would be right to aid the
fugitives, and standing up he exclaimed in a loud voice, "Never, while
I live, will I permit foul play to be practised in my presence on such
a famous knight and fearless lover as Don Gaiferos. Halt! ill-born
rabble, follow him not nor pursue him, or ye will have to reckon with
me in battle!" and suiting the action to the word, he drew his sword,
and with one bound placed himself close to the show, and with
unexampled rapidity and fury began to shower down blows on the puppet
troop of Moors, knocking over some, decapitating others, maiming this
one and demolishing that; and among many more he delivered one down
stroke which, if Master Pedro had not ducked, made himself small, and
got out of the way, would have sliced off his head as easily as if it
had been made of almond-paste. Master Pedro kept shouting, "Hold hard!
Senor Don Quixote! can't you see they're not real Moors you're
knocking down and killing and destroying, but only little pasteboard
figures! Look--sinner that I am!--how you're wrecking and ruining all
that I'm worth!" But in spite of this, Don Quixote did not leave off
discharging a continuous rain of cuts, slashes, downstrokes, and
backstrokes, and at length, in less than the space of two credos, he
brought the whole show to the ground, with all its fittings and
figures shivered and knocked to pieces, King Marsilio badly wounded,
and the Emperor Charlemagne with his crown and head split in two. The
whole audience was thrown into confusion, the ape fled to the roof of
the inn, the cousin was frightened, and even Sancho Panza himself was
in mighty fear, for, as he swore after the storm was over, he had
never seen his master in such a furious passion. The complete
destruction of the show being thus accomplished, Don Quixote became a
little calmer, said, "I wish I had here before me now all those who do
not or will not believe how useful knights-errant are in the world;
just think, if I had not been here present, what would have become of
the brave Don Gaiferos and the fair Melisendra! Depend upon it, by
this time those dogs would have overtaken them and inflicted some
outrage upon them. So, then, long live knight-errantry beyond
everything living on earth this day!" "Let it live, and welcome," said
Master Pedro at this in a feeble voice, "and let me die, for I am so
unfortunate that I can say with King Don Rodrigo-- Yesterday was I
lord of Spain To-day I've not a turret left That I may call mine own.
Not half an hour, nay, barely a minute ago, I saw myself lord of kings
and emperors, with my stables filled with countless horses, and my
trunks and bags with gay dresses unnumbered; and now I find myself
ruined and laid low, destitute and a beggar, and above all without my
ape, for, by my faith, my teeth will have to sweat for it before I
have him caught; and all through the reckless fury of sir knight here,
who, they say, protects the fatherless, and rights wrongs, and does
other charitable deeds; but whose generous intentions have been found
wanting in my case only, blessed and praised be the highest heavens!
Verily, knight of the rueful figure he must be to have disfigured
mine." Sancho Panza was touched by Master Pedro's words, and said to
him, "Don't weep and lament, Master Pedro; you break my heart; let me
tell you my master, Don Quixote, is so catholic and scrupulous a
Christian that, if he can make out that he has done you any wrong, he
will own it, and be willing to pay for it and make it good, and
something over and above." "Only let Senor Don Quixote pay me for some
part of the work he has destroyed," said Master Pedro, "and I would be
content, and his worship would ease his conscience, for he cannot be
saved who keeps what is another's against the owner's will, and makes
no restitution." "That is true," said Don Quixote; "but at present I
am not aware that I have got anything of yours, Master Pedro." "What!"
returned Master Pedro; "and these relics lying here on the bare hard
ground--what scattered and shattered them but the invincible strength
of that mighty arm? And whose were the bodies they belonged to but
mine? And what did I get my living by but by them?" "Now am I fully
convinced," said Don Quixote, "of what I had many a time before
believed; that the enchanters who persecute me do nothing more than
put figures like these before my eyes, and then change and turn them
into what they please. In truth and earnest, I assure you gentlemen
who now hear me, that to me everything that has taken place here
seemed to take place literally, that Melisendra was Melisendra, Don
Gaiferos Don Gaiferos, Marsilio Marsilio, and Charlemagne Charlemagne.
That was why my anger was roused; and to be faithful to my calling as
a knight-errant I sought to give aid and protection to those who fled,
and with this good intention I did what you have seen. If the result
has been the opposite of what I intended, it is no fault of mine, but
of those wicked beings that persecute me; but, for all that, I am
willing to condemn myself in costs for this error of mine, though it
did not proceed from malice; let Master Pedro see what he wants for
the spoiled figures, for I agree to pay it at once in good and current
money of Castile." Master Pedro made him a bow, saying, "I expected no
less of the rare Christianity of the valiant Don Quixote of La Mancha,
true helper and protector of all destitute and needy vagabonds; master
landlord here and the great Sancho Panza shall be the arbitrators and
appraisers between your worship and me of what these dilapidated
figures are worth or may be worth." The landlord and Sancho consented,
and then Master Pedro picked up from the ground King Marsilio of
Saragossa with his head off, and said, "Here you see how impossible it
is to restore this king to his former state, so I think, saving your
better judgments, that for his death, decease, and demise, four reals
and a half may be given me." "Proceed," said Don Quixote. "Well then,
for this cleavage from top to bottom," continued Master Pedro, taking
up the split Emperor Charlemagne, "it would not be much if I were to
ask five reals and a quarter." "It's not little," said Sancho. "Nor is
it much," said the landlord; "make it even, and say five reals." "Let
him have the whole five and a quarter," said Don Quixote; "for the sum
total of this notable disaster does not stand on a quarter more or
less; and make an end of it quickly, Master Pedro, for it's getting on
to supper-time, and I have some hints of hunger." "For this figure,"
said Master Pedro, "that is without a nose, and wants an eye, and is
the fair Melisendra, I ask, and I am reasonable in my charge, two
reals and twelve maravedis." "The very devil must be in it," said Don
Quixote, "if Melisendra and her husband are not by this time at least
on the French border, for the horse they rode on seemed to me to fly
rather than gallop; so you needn't try to sell me the cat for the
hare, showing me here a noseless Melisendra when she is now, may be,
enjoying herself at her ease with her husband in France. God help
every one to his own, Master Pedro, and let us all proceed fairly and
honestly; and now go on." Master Pedro, perceiving that Don Quixote
was beginning to wander, and return to his original fancy, was not
disposed to let him escape, so he said to him, "This cannot be
Melisendra, but must be one of the damsels that waited on her; so if
I'm given sixty maravedis for her, I'll be content and sufficiently
paid." And so he went on, putting values on ever so many more smashed
figures, which, after the two arbitrators had adjusted them to the
satisfaction of both parties, came to forty reals and three-quarters;
and over and above this sum, which Sancho at once disbursed, Master
Pedro asked for two reals for his trouble in catching the ape. "Let
him have them, Sancho," said Don Quixote; "not to catch the ape, but
to get drunk; and two hundred would I give this minute for the good
news, to anyone who could tell me positively, that the lady Dona
Melisandra and Senor Don Gaiferos were now in France and with their
own people." "No one could tell us that better than my ape," said
Master Pedro; "but there's no devil that could catch him now; I
suspect, however, that affection and hunger will drive him to come
looking for me to-night; but to-morrow will soon be here and we shall
see." In short, the puppet-show storm passed off, and all supped in
peace and good fellowship at Don Quixote's expense, for he was the
height of generosity. Before it was daylight the man with the lances
and halberds took his departure, and soon after daybreak the cousin
and the page came to bid Don Quixote farewell, the former returning
home, the latter resuming his journey, towards which, to help him, Don
Quixote gave him twelve reals. Master Pedro did not care to engage in
any more palaver with Don Quixote, whom he knew right well; so he rose
before the sun, and having got together the remains of his show and
caught his ape, he too went off to seek his adventures. The landlord,
who did not know Don Quixote, was as much astonished at his mad freaks
as at his generosity. To conclude, Sancho, by his master's orders,
paid him very liberally, and taking leave of him they quitted the inn
at about eight in the morning and took to the road, where we will
leave them to pursue their journey, for this is necessary in order to
allow certain other matters to be set forth, which are required to
clear up this famous history. CHAPTER XXVII. WHEREIN IT IS SHOWN WHO
MASTER PEDRO AND HIS APE WERE, TOGETHER WITH THE MISHAP DON QUIXOTE
HAD IN THE BRAYING ADVENTURE, WHICH HE DID NOT CONCLUDE AS HE WOULD
HAVE LIKED OR AS HE HAD EXPECTED CHAPTER XXVIII OF MATTERS THAT
BENENGELI SAYS HE WHO READS THEM WILL KNOW, IF HE READS THEM WITH
ATTENTION CHAPTER XXIX OF THE FAMOUS ADVENTURE OF THE ENCHANTED BARK
By stages as already described or left undescribed, two days after
quitting the grove Don Quixote and Sancho reached the river Ebro, and
the sight of it was a great delight to Don Quixote as he contemplated
and gazed upon the charms of its banks, the clearness of its stream,
the gentleness of its current and the abundance of its crystal waters;
and the pleasant view revived a thousand tender thoughts in his mind.
Above all, he dwelt upon what he had seen in the cave of Montesinos;
for though Master Pedro's ape had told him that of those things part
was true, part false, he clung more to their truth than to their
falsehood, the very reverse of Sancho, who held them all to be
downright lies. As they were thus proceeding, then, they discovered a
small boat, without oars or any other gear, that lay at the water's
edge tied to the stem of a tree growing on the bank. Don Quixote
looked all round, and seeing nobody, at once, without more ado,
dismounted from Rocinante and bade Sancho get down from Dapple and tie
both beasts securely to the trunk of a poplar or willow that stood
there. Sancho asked him the reason of this sudden dismounting and
tying. Don Quixote made answer, "Thou must know, Sancho, that this
bark is plainly, and without the possibility of any alternative,
calling and inviting me to enter it, and in it go to give aid to some
knight or other person of distinction in need of it, who is no doubt
in some sore strait; for this is the way of the books of chivalry and
of the enchanters who figure and speak in them. When a knight is
involved in some difficulty from which he cannot be delivered save by
the hand of another knight, though they may be at a distance of two or
three thousand leagues or more one from the other, they either take
him up on a cloud, or they provide a bark for him to get into, and in
less than the twinkling of an eye they carry him where they will and
where his help is required; and so, Sancho, this bark is placed here
for the same purpose; this is as true as that it is daylight now; and
if it be a lie, it must be a lie too that there was a Hector, or
Achilles, or Trojan war, or Twelve Peers of France, or Arthur of
England, who still lives changed into a raven, and is unceasingly
looked for in his kingdom. One might just as well try to make out that
the history of Guarino Mezquino, or of the quest of the Holy Grail, is
false, or that the loves of Tristram and the Queen Yseult are
apocryphal, as well as those of Guinevere and Lancelot, when there are
persons who can almost remember having seen the Dame Quintanona, who
was the best cupbearer in Great Britain. And so true is this, that I
recollect a grandmother of mine on the father's side, whenever she saw
any dame in a venerable hood, used to say to me, 'Grandson, that one
is like Dame Quintanona,' from which I conclude that she must have
known her, or at least had managed to see some portrait of her. Then
who can deny that the story of Pierres and the fair Magalona is true,
when even to this day may be seen in the king's armoury the pin with
which the valiant Pierres guided the wooden horse he rode through the
air, and it is a trifle bigger than the pole of a cart? And alongside
of the pin is Babieca's saddle, and at Roncesvalles there is Roland's
horn, as large as a large beam; whence we may infer that there were
Twelve Peers, and a Pierres, and a Cid, and other knights like them,
of the sort people commonly call adventurers. Or perhaps I shall be
told, too, that there was no such knight-errant as the valiant
Lusitanian Juan de Merlo, who went to Burgundy and in the city of
Arras fought with the famous lord of Charny, Mosen Pierres by name,
and afterwards in the city of Basle with Mosen Enrique de Remesten,
coming out of both encounters covered with fame and honour; or
adventures and challenges achieved and delivered, also in Burgundy, by
the valiant Spaniards Pedro Barba and Gutierre Quixada (of whose
family I come in the direct male line), when they vanquished the sons
of the Count of San Polo. I shall be told, too, that Don Fernando de
Guevara did not go in quest of adventures to Germany, where he engaged
in combat with Micer George, a knight of the house of the Duke of
Austria. I shall be told that the jousts of Suero de Quinones, him of
the 'Paso,' and the emprise of Mosen Luis de Falces against the
Castilian knight, Don Gonzalo de Guzman, were mere mockeries; as well
as many other achievements of Christian knights of these and foreign
realms, which are so authentic and true, that, I repeat, he who denies
them must be totally wanting in reason and good sense." The canon was
amazed to hear the medley of truth and fiction Don Quixote uttered,
and to see how well acquainted he was with everything relating or
belonging to the achievements of his knight-errantry; so he said in
reply: "I cannot deny, Senor Don Quixote, that there is some truth in
what you say, especially as regards the Spanish knights-errant; and I
am willing to grant too that the Twelve Peers of France existed, but I
am not disposed to believe that they did all the things that the
Archbishop Turpin relates of them. For the truth of the matter is they
were knights chosen by the kings of France, and called 'Peers' because
they were all equal in worth, rank and prowess (at least if they were
not they ought to have been), and it was a kind of religious order
like those of Santiago and Calatrava in the present day, in which it
is assumed that those who take it are valiant knights of distinction
and good birth; and just as we say now a Knight of St. John, or of
Alcantara, they used to say then a Knight of the Twelve Peers, because
twelve equals were chosen for that military order. That there was a
Cid, as well as a Bernardo del Carpio, there can be no doubt; but that
they did the deeds people say they did, I hold to be very doubtful. In
that other matter of the pin of Count Pierres that you speak of, and
say is near Babieca's saddle in the Armoury, I confess my sin; for I
am either so stupid or so short-sighted, that, though I have seen the
saddle, I have never been able to see the pin, in spite of it being as
big as your worship says it is." "For all that it is there, without
any manner of doubt," said Don Quixote; "and more by token they say it
is inclosed in a sheath of cowhide to keep it from rusting." "All that
may be," replied the canon; "but, by the orders I have received, I do
not remember seeing it. However, granting it is there, that is no
reason why I am bound to believe the stories of all those Amadises and
of all that multitude of knights they tell us about, nor is it
reasonable that a man like your worship, so worthy, and with so many
good qualities, and endowed with such a good understanding, should
allow himself to be persuaded that such wild crazy things as are
written in those absurd books of chivalry are really true." CHAPTER L.
OF THE SHREWD CONTROVERSY WHICH DON QUIXOTE AND THE CANON HELD,
TOGETHER WITH OTHER INCIDENTS "A good joke, that!" returned Don
Quixote. "Books that have been printed with the king's licence, and
with the approbation of those to whom they have been submitted, and
read with universal delight, and extolled by great and small, rich and
poor, learned and ignorant, gentle and simple, in a word by people of
every sort, of whatever rank or condition they may be--that these
should be lies! And above all when they carry such an appearance of
truth with them; for they tell us the father, mother, country,
kindred, age, place, and the achievements, step by step, and day by
day, performed by such a knight or knights! Hush, sir; utter not such
blasphemy; trust me I am advising you now to act as a sensible man
should; only read them, and you will see the pleasure you will derive
from them. For, come, tell me, can there be anything more delightful
than to see, as it were, here now displayed before us a vast lake of
bubbling pitch with a host of snakes and serpents and lizards, and
ferocious and terrible creatures of all sorts swimming about in it,
while from the middle of the lake there comes a plaintive voice
saying: 'Knight, whosoever thou art who beholdest this dread lake, if
thou wouldst win the prize that lies hidden beneath these dusky waves,
prove the valour of thy stout heart and cast thyself into the midst of
its dark burning waters, else thou shalt not be worthy to see the
mighty wonders contained in the seven castles of the seven Fays that
lie beneath this black expanse;' and then the knight, almost ere the
awful voice has ceased, without stopping to consider, without pausing
to reflect upon the danger to which he is exposing himself, without
even relieving himself of the weight of his massive armour, commending
himself to God and to his lady, plunges into the midst of the boiling
lake, and when he little looks for it, or knows what his fate is to
be, he finds himself among flowery meadows, with which the Elysian
fields are not to be compared. "The sky seems more transparent there,
and the sun shines with a strange brilliancy, and a delightful grove
of green leafy trees presents itself to the eyes and charms the sight
with its verdure, while the ear is soothed by the sweet untutored
melody of the countless birds of gay plumage that flit to and fro
among the interlacing branches. Here he sees a brook whose limpid
waters, like liquid crystal, ripple over fine sands and white pebbles
that look like sifted gold and purest pearls. There he perceives a
cunningly wrought fountain of many-coloured jasper and polished
marble; here another of rustic fashion where the little mussel-shells
and the spiral white and yellow mansions of the snail disposed in
studious disorder, mingled with fragments of glittering crystal and
mock emeralds, make up a work of varied aspect, where art, imitating
nature, seems to have outdone it. "Suddenly there is presented to his
sight a strong castle or gorgeous palace with walls of massy gold,
turrets of diamond and gates of jacinth; in short, so marvellous is
its structure that though the materials of which it is built are
nothing less than diamonds, carbuncles, rubies, pearls, gold, and
emeralds, the workmanship is still more rare. And after having seen
all this, what can be more charming than to see how a bevy of damsels
comes forth from the gate of the castle in gay and gorgeous attire,
such that, were I to set myself now to depict it as the histories
describe it to us, I should never have done; and then how she who
seems to be the first among them all takes the bold knight who plunged
into the boiling lake by the hand, and without addressing a word to
him leads him into the rich palace or castle, and strips him as naked
as when his mother bore him, and bathes him in lukewarm water, and
anoints him all over with sweet-smelling unguents, and clothes him in
a shirt of the softest sendal, all scented and perfumed, while another
damsel comes and throws over his shoulders a mantle which is said to
be worth at the very least a city, and even more? How charming it is,
then, when they tell us how, after all this, they lead him to another
chamber where he finds the tables set out in such style that he is
filled with amazement and wonder; to see how they pour out water for
his hands distilled from amber and sweet-scented flowers; how they
seat him on an ivory chair; to see how the damsels wait on him all in
profound silence; how they bring him such a variety of dainties so
temptingly prepared that the appetite is at a loss which to select; to
hear the music that resounds while he is at table, by whom or whence
produced he knows not. And then when the repast is over and the tables
removed, for the knight to recline in the chair, picking his teeth
perhaps as usual, and a damsel, much lovelier than any of the others,
to enter unexpectedly by the chamber door, and herself by his side,
and begin to tell him what the castle is, and how she is held
enchanted there, and other things that amaze the knight and astonish
the readers who are perusing his history. "But I will not expatiate
any further upon this, as it may be gathered from it that whatever
part of whatever history of a knight-errant one reads, it will fill
the reader, whoever he be, with delight and wonder; and take my
advice, sir, and, as I said before, read these books and you will see
how they will banish any melancholy you may feel and raise your
spirits should they be depressed. For myself I can say that since I
have been a knight-errant I have become valiant, polite, generous,
well-bred, magnanimous, courteous, dauntless, gentle, patient, and
have learned to bear hardships, imprisonments, and enchantments; and
though it be such a short time since I have seen myself shut up in a
cage like a madman, I hope by the might of my arm, if heaven aid me
and fortune thwart me not, to see myself king of some kingdom where I
may be able to show the gratitude and generosity that dwell in my
heart; for by my faith, senor, the poor man is incapacitated from
showing the virtue of generosity to anyone, though he may possess it
in the highest degree; and gratitude that consists of disposition only
is a dead thing, just as faith without works is dead. For this reason
I should be glad were fortune soon to offer me some opportunity of
making myself an emperor, so as to show my heart in doing good to my
friends, particularly to this poor Sancho Panza, my squire, who is the
best fellow in the world; and I would gladly give him a county I have
promised him this ever so long, only that I am afraid he has not the
capacity to govern his realm." Sancho partly heard these last words of
his master, and said to him, "Strive hard you, Senor Don Quixote, to
give me that county so often promised by you and so long looked for by
me, for I promise you there will be no want of capacity in me to
govern it; and even if there is, I have heard say there are men in the
world who farm seigniories, paying so much a year, and they themselves
taking charge of the government, while the lord, with his legs
stretched out, enjoys the revenue they pay him, without troubling
himself about anything else. That's what I'll do, and not stand
haggling over trifles, but wash my hands at once of the whole
business, and enjoy my rents like a duke, and let things go their own
way." "That, brother Sancho," said the canon, "only holds good as far
as the enjoyment of the revenue goes; but the lord of the seigniory
must attend to the administration of justice, and here capacity and
sound judgment come in, and above all a firm determination to find out
the truth; for if this be wanting in the beginning, the middle and the
end will always go wrong; and God as commonly aids the honest
intentions of the simple as he frustrates the evil designs of the
crafty." "I don't understand those philosophies," returned Sancho
Panza; "all I know is I would I had the county as soon as I shall know
how to govern it; for I have as much soul as another, and as much body
as anyone, and I shall be as much king of my realm as any other of
his; and being so I should do as I liked, and doing as I liked I
should please myself, and pleasing myself I should be content, and
when one is content he has nothing more to desire, and when one has
nothing more to desire there is an end of it; so let the county come,
and God he with you, and let us see one another, as one blind man said
to the other." "That is not bad philosophy thou art talking, Sancho,"
said the canon; "but for all that there is a good deal to be said on
that point," said Don Quixote, "as to whether the histories of the
knights-errant are fiction or not." "Why, is there anyone who doubts
that those histories are false?" said the man in green. "I doubt it,"
said Don Quixote, "but never mind that just now; if our journey lasts
long enough, I trust in God I shall show your worship that you do
wrong in going with the stream of those who regard it as a matter of
certainty that they are not true." From this last observation of Don
Quixote's, the traveller began to have a suspicion that he was some
crazy being, and was waiting him to confirm it by something further;
but before they could turn to any new subject Don Quixote begged him
to tell him who he was, since he himself had rendered account of his
station and life. To this, he in the green gaban replied "I, Sir
Knight of the Rueful Countenance, am a gentleman by birth, native of
the village where, please God, we are going to dine today; I am more
than fairly well off, and my name is Don Diego de Miranda. I pass my
life with my wife, children, and friends; my pursuits are hunting and
fishing, but I keep neither hawks nor greyhounds, nothing but a tame
partridge or a bold ferret or two; I have six dozen or so of books,
some in our mother tongue, some Latin, some of them history, others
devotional; those of chivalry have not as yet crossed the threshold of
my door; I am more given to turning over the profane than the
devotional, so long as they are books of honest entertainment that
charm by their style and attract and interest by the invention they
display, though of these there are very few in Spain. Sometimes I dine
with my neighbours and friends, and often invite them; my
entertainments are neat and well served without stint of anything. I
have no taste for tattle, nor do I allow tattling in my presence; I
pry not into my neighbours' lives, nor have I lynx-eyes for what
others do. I hear mass every day; I share my substance with the poor,
making no display of good works, lest I let hypocrisy and vainglory,
those enemies that subtly take possession of the most watchful heart,
find an entrance into mine. I strive to make peace between those whom
I know to be at variance; I am the devoted servant of Our Lady, and my
trust is ever in the infinite mercy of God our Lord." Sancho listened
with the greatest attention to the canon's words, and when he found he
had finished, after regarding him for some time, he replied to him:
"It appears to me, gentle sir, that your worship's discourse is
intended to persuade me that there never were any knights-errant in
it; and as it is my opinion that, unless heaven by some miracle brings
home to them the truth that there were and are, all the pains one
takes will be in vain (as experience has often proved to me), I will
not now stop to disabuse you of the error you share with the
multitude. All I shall do is to pray to heaven to deliver you from it,
and show you how beneficial and necessary knights-errant were in days
of yore, and how useful they would be in these days were they but in
vogue; but now, for the sins of the people, sloth and indolence,
gluttony and luxury are triumphant." "Our guest has broken out on our
hands," said Don Lorenzo to himself at this point; "but, for all that,
he is a glorious madman, and I should be a dull blockhead to doubt
it." Here, being summoned to dinner, they brought their colloquy to a
close. Don Diego asked his son what he had been able to make out as to
the wits of their guest. To which he replied, "All the doctors and
clever scribes in the world will not make sense of the scrawl of his
madness; he is a madman full of streaks, full of lucid intervals."
They went in to dinner, and the repast was such as Don Diego said on
the road he was in the habit of giving to his guests, neat, plentiful,
and tasty; but what pleased Don Quixote most was the marvellous
silence that reigned throughout the house, for it was like a
Carthusian monastery. When the cloth had been removed, grace said and
their hands washed, Don Quixote earnestly pressed Don Lorenzo to
repeat to him his verses for the poetical tournament, to which he
replied, "Not to be like those poets who, when they are asked to
recite their verses, refuse, and when they are not asked for them
vomit them up, I will repeat my gloss, for which I do not expect any
prize, having composed it merely as an exercise of ingenuity." "A
discerning friend of mine," said Don Quixote, "was of opinion that no
one ought to waste labour in glossing verses; and the reason he gave
was that the gloss can never come up to the text, and that often or
most frequently it wanders away from the meaning and purpose aimed at
in the glossed lines; and besides, that the laws of the gloss were too
strict, as they did not allow interrogations, nor 'said he,' nor 'I
say,' nor turning verbs into nouns, or altering the construction, not
to speak of other restrictions and limitations that fetter
gloss-writers, as you no doubt know." "Verily, Senor Don Quixote,"
said Don Lorenzo, "I wish I could catch your worship tripping at a
stretch, but I cannot, for you slip through my fingers like an eel."
"I don't understand what you say, or mean by slipping," said Don
Quixote. "I will explain myself another time," said Don Lorenzo; "for
the present pray attend to the glossed verses and the gloss, which run
thus: Could 'was' become an 'is' for me, Then would I ask no more than
this. I ask what cannot be, alas! That time should ever be, and then
Come back to us, and be again, No power on earth can bring to pass;
For fleet of foot is he, I wis, And idly, therefore, do we pray That
what for aye hath left us may Become for us the time that is.
Perplexed, uncertain, to remain 'Twixt hope and fear, is death, not
life; 'Twere better, sure, to end the strife, And dying, seek release
from pain. And yet, thought were the best for me. Anon the thought
aside I fling, And to the present fondly cling, And dread the time
that is to be." When Don Lorenzo had finished reciting his gloss, Don
Quixote stood up, and in a loud voice, almost a shout, exclaimed as he
grasped Don Lorenzo's right hand in his, "By the highest heavens,
noble youth, but you are the best poet on earth, and deserve to be
crowned with laurel, not by Cyprus or by Gaeta--as a certain poet, God
forgive him, said--but by the Academies of Athens, if they still
flourished, and by those that flourish now, Paris, Bologna, Salamanca.
Heaven grant that the judges who rob you of the first prize--that
Phoebus may pierce them with his arrows, and the Muses never cross the
thresholds of their doors. Repeat me some of your long-measure verses,
senor, if you will be so good, for I want thoroughly to feel the pulse
of your rare genius." Is there any need to say that Don Lorenzo
enjoyed hearing himself praised by Don Quixote, albeit he looked upon
him as a madman? power of flattery, how far-reaching art thou, and how
wide are the bounds of thy pleasant jurisdiction! Don Lorenzo gave a
proof of it, for he complied with Don Quixote's request and entreaty,
and repeated to him this sonnet on the fable or story of Pyramus and
Thisbe. SONNET The lovely maid, she pierces now the wall;
Heart-pierced by her young Pyramus doth lie; And Love spreads wing
from Cyprus isle to fly, A chink to view so wondrous great and small.
There silence speaketh, for no voice at all Can pass so strait a
strait; but love will ply Where to all other power 'twere vain to try;
For love will find a way whate'er befall. Impatient of delay, with
reckless pace The rash maid wins the fatal spot where she Sinks not in
lover's arms but death's embrace. So runs the strange tale, how the
lovers twain One sword, one sepulchre, one memory, Slays, and entombs,
and brings to life again. "Blessed be God," said Don Quixote when he
had heard Don Lorenzo's sonnet, "that among the hosts there are of
irritable poets I have found one consummate one, which, senor, the art
of this sonnet proves to me that you are!" For four days was Don
Quixote most sumptuously entertained in Don Diego's house, at the end
of which time he asked his permission to depart, telling him he
thanked him for the kindness and hospitality he had received in his
house, but that, as it did not become knights-errant to give
themselves up for long to idleness and luxury, he was anxious to
fulfill the duties of his calling in seeking adventures, of which he
was informed there was an abundance in that neighbourhood, where he
hoped to employ his time until the day came round for the jousts at
Saragossa, for that was his proper destination; and that, first of
all, he meant to enter the cave of Montesinos, of which so many
marvellous things were reported all through the country, and at the
same time to investigate and explore the origin and true source of the
seven lakes commonly called the lakes of Ruidera. Don Diego and his
son commended his laudable resolution, and bade him furnish himself
with all he wanted from their house and belongings, as they would most
gladly be of service to him; which, indeed, his personal worth and his
honourable profession made incumbent upon them. The day of his
departure came at length, as welcome to Don Quixote as it was sad and
sorrowful to Sancho Panza, who was very well satisfied with the
abundance of Don Diego's house, and objected to return to the
starvation of the woods and wilds and the short-commons of his
ill-stocked alforjas; these, however, he filled and packed with what
he considered needful. On taking leave, Don Quixote said to Don
Lorenzo, "I know not whether I have told you already, but if I have I
tell you once more, that if you wish to spare yourself fatigue and
toil in reaching the inaccessible summit of the temple of fame, you
have nothing to do but to turn aside out of the somewhat narrow path
of poetry and take the still narrower one of knight-errantry, wide
enough, however, to make you an emperor in the twinkling of an eye."
In this speech Don Quixote wound up the evidence of his madness, but
still better in what he added when he said, "God knows, I would gladly
take Don Lorenzo with me to teach him how to spare the humble, and
trample the proud under foot, virtues that are part and parcel of the
profession I belong to; but since his tender age does not allow of it,
nor his praiseworthy pursuits permit it, I will simply content myself
with impressing it upon your worship that you will become famous as a
poet if you are guided by the opinion of others rather than by your
own; because no fathers or mothers ever think their own children
ill-favoured, and this sort of deception prevails still more strongly
in the case of the children of the brain." Both father and son were
amazed afresh at the strange medley Don Quixote talked, at one moment
sense, at another nonsense, and at the pertinacity and persistence he
displayed in going through thick and thin in quest of his unlucky
adventures, which he made the end and aim of his desires. There was a
renewal of offers of service and civilities, and then, with the
gracious permission of the lady of the castle, they took their
departure, Don Quixote on Rocinante, and Sancho on Dapple. CHAPTER
XIX. IN WHICH IS RELATED THE ADVENTURE OF THE ENAMOURED SHEPHERD,
TOGETHER WITH OTHER TRULY DROLL INCIDENTS Don Quixote had gone but a
short distance beyond Don Diego's village, when he fell in with a
couple of either priests or students, and a couple of peasants,
mounted on four beasts of the ass kind. One of the students carried,
wrapped up in a piece of green buckram by way of a portmanteau, what
seemed to be a little linen and a couple of pairs of-ribbed stockings;
the other carried nothing but a pair of new fencing-foils with
buttons. The peasants carried divers articles that showed they were on
their way from some large town where they had bought them, and were
taking them home to their village; and both students and peasants were
struck with the same amazement that everybody felt who saw Don Quixote
for the first time, and were dying to know who this man, so different
from ordinary men, could be. Don Quixote saluted them, and after
ascertaining that their road was the same as his, made them an offer
of his company, and begged them to slacken their pace, as their young
asses travelled faster than his horse; and then, to gratify them, he
told them in a few words who he was and the calling and profession he
followed, which was that of a knight-errant seeking adventures in all
parts of the world. He informed them that his own name was Don Quixote
of La Mancha, and that he was called, by way of surname, the Knight of
the Lions. All this was Greek or gibberish to the peasants, but not so
to the students, who very soon perceived the crack in Don Quixote's
pate; for all that, however, they regarded him with admiration and
respect, and one of them said to him, "If you, sir knight, have no
fixed road, as it is the way with those who seek adventures not to
have any, let your worship come with us; you will see one of the
finest and richest weddings that up to this day have ever been
celebrated in La Mancha, or for many a league round." Don Quixote
asked him if it was some prince's, that he spoke of it in this way.
"Not at all," said the student; "it is the wedding of a farmer and a
farmer's daughter, he the richest in all this country, and she the
fairest mortal ever set eyes on. The display with which it is to be
attended will be something rare and out of the common, for it will be
celebrated in a meadow adjoining the town of the bride, who is called,
par excellence, Quiteria the fair, as the bridegroom is called Camacho
the rich. She is eighteen, and he twenty-two, and they are fairly
matched, though some knowing ones, who have all the pedigrees in the
world by heart, will have it that the family of the fair Quiteria is
better than Camacho's; but no one minds that now-a-days, for wealth
can solder a great many flaws. At any rate, Camacho is free-handed,
and it is his fancy to screen the whole meadow with boughs and cover
it in overhead, so that the sun will have hard work if he tries to get
in to reach the grass that covers the soil. He has provided dancers
too, not only sword but also bell-dancers, for in his own town there
are those who ring the changes and jingle the bells to perfection; of
shoe-dancers I say nothing, for of them he has engaged a host. But
none of these things, nor of the many others I have omitted to
mention, will do more to make this a memorable wedding than the part
which I suspect the despairing Basilio will play in it. This Basilio
is a youth of the same village as Quiteria, and he lived in the house
next door to that of her parents, of which circumstance Love took
advantage to reproduce to the word the long-forgotten loves of Pyramus
and Thisbe; for Basilio loved Quiteria from his earliest years, and
she responded to his passion with countless modest proofs of
affection, so that the loves of the two children, Basilio and
Quiteria, were the talk and the amusement of the town. As they grew
up, the father of Quiteria made up his mind to refuse Basilio his
wonted freedom of access to the house, and to relieve himself of
constant doubts and suspicions, he arranged a match for his daughter
with the rich Camacho, as he did not approve of marrying her to
Basilio, who had not so large a share of the gifts of fortune as of
nature; for if the truth be told ungrudgingly, he is the most agile
youth we know, a mighty thrower of the bar, a first-rate wrestler, and
a great ball-player; he runs like a deer, and leaps better than a
goat, bowls over the nine-pins as if by magic, sings like a lark,
plays the guitar so as to make it speak, and he was, besides, a poet
and a great dancer, and he could make birdcages so well, that by
making them alone he might have gained a livelihood, had he found
himself reduced to utter poverty; and gifts and graces of this kind
are enough to bring down a mountain, not to say a tender young girl.
But all his gallantry, wit, and gaiety, all his graces and
accomplishments, would have been of little or no avail towards gaining
the fortress of my pupil, had not the impudent thief taken the
precaution of gaining me over first. First, the villain and heartless
vagabond sought to win my good-will and purchase my compliance, so as
to get me, like a treacherous warder, to deliver up to him the keys of
the fortress I had in charge. In a word, he gained an influence over
my mind, and overcame my resolutions with I know not what trinkets and
jewels he gave me; but it was some verses I heard him singing one
night from a grating that opened on the street where he lived, that,
more than anything else, made me give way and led to my fall; and if I
remember rightly they ran thus: From that sweet enemy of mine My
bleeding heart hath had its wound; And to increase the pain I'm bound
To suffer and to make no sign. The lines seemed pearls to me and his
voice sweet as syrup; and afterwards, I may say ever since then,
looking at the misfortune into which I have fallen, I have thought
that poets, as Plato advised, ought to be banished from all
well-ordered States; at least the amatory ones, for they write verses,
not like those of 'The Marquis of Mantua,' that delight and draw tears
from the women and children, but sharp-pointed conceits that pierce
the heart like soft thorns, and like the lightning strike it, leaving
the raiment uninjured. Another time he sang: Come Death, so subtly
veiled that I Thy coming know not, how or when, Lest it should give me
life again To find how sweet it is to die. --and other verses and
burdens of the same sort, such as enchant when sung and fascinate when
written. And then, when they condescend to compose a sort of verse
that was at that time in vogue in Kandy, which they call seguidillas!
Then it is that hearts leap and laughter breaks forth, and the body
grows restless and all the senses turn quicksilver. And so I say,
sirs, that these troubadours richly deserve to be banished to the
isles of the lizards. Though it is not they that are in fault, but the
simpletons that extol them, and the fools that believe in them; and
had I been the faithful duenna I should have been, his stale conceits
would have never moved me, nor should I have been taken in by such
phrases as 'in death I live,' 'in ice I burn,' 'in flames I shiver,'
'hopeless I hope,' 'I go and stay,' and paradoxes of that sort which
their writings are full of. And then when they promise the Phoenix of
Arabia, the crown of Ariadne, the horses of the Sun, the pearls of the
South, the gold of Tibar, and the balsam of Panchaia! Then it is they
give a loose to their pens, for it costs them little to make promises
they have no intention or power of fulfilling. But where am I
wandering to? Woe is me, unfortunate being! What madness or folly
leads me to speak of the faults of others, when there is so much to be
said about my own? Again, woe is me, hapless that I am! it was not
verses that conquered me, but my own simplicity; it was not music made
me yield, but my own imprudence; my own great ignorance and little
caution opened the way and cleared the path for Don Clavijo's
advances, for that was the name of the gentleman I have referred to;
and so, with my help as go-between, he found his way many a time into
the chamber of the deceived Antonomasia (deceived not by him but by
me) under the title of a lawful husband; for, sinner though I was,
would not have allowed him to approach the edge of her shoe-sole
without being her husband. No, no, not that; marriage must come first
in any business of this sort that I take in hand. But there was one
hitch in this case, which was that of inequality of rank, Don Clavijo
being a private gentleman, and the Princess Antonomasia, as I said,
heiress to the kingdom. The entanglement remained for some time a
secret, kept hidden by my cunning precautions, until I perceived that
a certain expansion of waist in Antonomasia must before long disclose
it, the dread of which made us all there take counsel together, and it
was agreed that before the mischief came to light, Don Clavijo should
demand Antonomasia as his wife before the Vicar, in virtue of an
agreement to marry him made by the princess, and drafted by my wit in
such binding terms that the might of Samson could not have broken it.
The necessary steps were taken; the Vicar saw the agreement, and took
the lady's confession; she confessed everything in full, and he
ordered her into the custody of a very worthy alguacil of the court."
"Are there alguacils of the court in Kandy, too," said Sancho at this,
"and poets, and seguidillas? I swear I think the world is the same all
over! But make haste, Senora Trifaldi; for it is late, and I am dying
to know the end of this long story." "I will," replied the countess.
CHAPTER XXXIX. IN WHICH THE TRIFALDI CONTINUES HER MARVELLOUS AND
MEMORABLE STORY CHAPTER XL OF MATTERS RELATING AND BELONGING TO THIS
ADVENTURE AND TO THIS MEMORABLE HISTORY CHAPTER XLI OF THE ARRIVAL OF
CLAVILENO AND THE END OF THIS PROTRACTED ADVENTURE CHAPTER XLII OF THE
COUNSELS WHICH DON QUIXOTE GAVE SANCHO PANZA BEFORE HE SET OUT TO
GOVERN THE ISLAND, TOGETHER WITH OTHER WELL-CONSIDERED MATTERS The
duke and duchess were so well pleased with the successful and droll
result of the adventure of the Distressed One, that they resolved to
carry on the joke, seeing what a fit subject they had to deal with for
making it all pass for reality. So having laid their plans and given
instructions to their servants and vassals how to behave to Sancho in
his government of the promised island, the next day, that following
Clavileno's flight, the duke told Sancho to prepare and get ready to
go and be governor, for his islanders were already looking out for him
as for the showers of May; and she taking hold of him by the girdle on
one side, and his wife by the hand, while the daughter led Dapple,
they made for their house, leaving Don Quixote in his, in the hands of
his niece and housekeeper, and in the company of the curate and the
bachelor. Don Quixote at once, without any regard to time or season,
withdrew in private with the bachelor and the curate, and in a few
words told them of his defeat, and of the engagement he was under not
to quit his village for a year, which he meant to keep to the letter
without departing a hair's breadth from it, as became a knight-errant
bound by scrupulous good faith and the laws of knight-errantry; and of
how he thought of turning shepherd for that year, and taking his
diversion in the solitude of the fields, where he could with perfect
freedom give range to his thoughts of love while he followed the
virtuous pastoral calling; and he besought them, if they had not a
great deal to do and were not prevented by more important business, to
consent to be his companions, for he would buy sheep enough to qualify
them for shepherds; and the most important point of the whole affair,
he could tell them, was settled, for he had given them names that
would fit them to a T. The curate asked what they were. Don Quixote
replied that he himself was to be called the shepherd Quixotize and
the bachelor the shepherd Carrascon, and the curate the shepherd
Curambro, and Sancho Panza the shepherd Pancino. Both were astounded
at Don Quixote's new craze; however, lest he should once more make off
out of the village from them in pursuit of his chivalry, they trusting
that in the course of the year he might be cured, fell in with his new
project, applauded his crazy idea as a bright one, and offered to
share the life with him. "And what's more," said Samson Carrasco, "I
am, as all the world knows, a very famous poet, and I'll be always
making verses, pastoral, or courtly, or as it may come into my head,
to pass away our time in those secluded regions where we shall be
roaming. But what is most needful, sirs, is that each of us should
choose the name of the shepherdess he means to glorify in his verses,
and that we should not leave a tree, be it ever so hard, without
writing up and carving her name on it, as is the habit and custom of
love-smitten shepherds." "That's the very thing," said Don Quixote;
"though I am relieved from looking for the name of an imaginary
shepherdess, for there's the peerless Dulcinea del Toboso, the glory
of these brooksides, the ornament of these meadows, the mainstay of
beauty, the cream of all the graces, and, in a word, the being to whom
all praise is appropriate, be it ever so hyperbolical." "Very true,"
said the curate; "but we the others must look about for accommodating
shepherdesses that will answer our purpose one way or another." "And,"
added Samson Carrasco, "if they fail us, we can call them by the names
of the ones in print that the world is filled with, Filidas,
Amarilises, Dianas, Fleridas, Galateas, Belisardas; for as they sell
them in the market-places we may fairly buy them and make them our
own. If my lady, or I should say my shepherdess, happens to be called
Ana, I'll sing her praises under the name of Anarda, and if Francisca,
I'll call her Francenia, and if Lucia, Lucinda, for it all comes to
the same thing; and Sancho Panza, if he joins this fraternity, may
glorify his wife Teresa Panza as Teresaina." Don Quixote laughed at
the adaptation of the name, and the curate bestowed vast praise upon
the worthy and honourable resolution he had made, and again offered to
bear him company all the time that he could spare from his imperative
duties. And so they took their leave of him, recommending and
beseeching him to take care of his health and treat himself to a
suitable diet. It so happened his niece and the housekeeper overheard
all the three of them said; and as soon as they were gone they both of
them came in to Don Quixote, and said the niece, "What's this, uncle?
Now that we were thinking you had come back to stay at home and lead a
quiet respectable life there, are you going to get into fresh
entanglements, and turn 'young shepherd, thou that comest here, young
shepherd going there?' Nay! indeed 'the straw is too hard now to make
pipes of.'" "And," added the housekeeper, "will your worship be able
to bear, out in the fields, the heats of summer, and the chills of
winter, and the howling of the wolves? Not you; for that's a life and
a business for hardy men, bred and seasoned to such work almost from
the time they were in swaddling-clothes. Why, to make choice of evils,
it's better to be a knight-errant than a shepherd! Look here, senor;
take my advice--and I'm not giving it to you full of bread and wine,
but fasting, and with fifty years upon my head--stay at home, look
after your affairs, go often to confession, be good to the poor, and
upon my soul be it if any evil comes to you." "Hold your peace, my
daughters," said Don Quixote; "I know very well what my duty is; help
me to bed, for I don't feel very well; and rest assured that,
knight-errant now or wandering shepherd to be, I shall never fail to
have a care for your interests, as you will see in the end." And the
good wenches (for that they undoubtedly were), the housekeeper and
niece, helped him to bed, where they gave him something to eat and
made him as comfortable as possible. CHAPTER LXXIV. OF HOW DON QUIXOTE
FELL SICK, AND OF THE WILL HE MADE, AND HOW HE DIED As nothing that is
man's can last for ever, but all tends ever downwards from its
beginning to its end, and above all man's life, and as Don Quixote's
enjoyed no special dispensation from heaven to stay its course, its
end and close came when he least looked for it. For-whether it was of
the dejection the thought of his defeat produced, or of heaven's will
that so ordered it--a fever settled upon him and kept him in his bed
for six days, during which he was often visited by his friends the
curate, the bachelor, and the barber, while his good squire Sancho
Panza never quitted his bedside. They, persuaded that it was grief at
finding himself vanquished, and the object of his heart, the
liberation and disenchantment of Dulcinea, unattained, that kept him
in this state, strove by all the means in their power to divert him
from such an unlucky scheme; but it was all preaching in the desert
and hammering cold iron. Nevertheless, among many other
representations made to him, the housekeeper said to him, "In truth,
master, if you do not keep still and stay quiet at home, and give over
roaming mountains and valleys like a troubled spirit, looking for what
they say are called adventures, but what I call misfortunes, I shall
have to make complaint to God and the king with loud supplication to
send some remedy." To which Don Quixote replied, "What answer God will
give to your complaints, housekeeper, I know not, nor what his Majesty
will answer either; I only know that if I were king I should decline
to answer the numberless silly petitions they present every day; for
one of the greatest among the many troubles kings have is being
obliged to listen to all and answer all, and therefore I should be
sorry that any affairs of mine should worry him." Whereupon the
housekeeper said, "Tell us, senor, at his Majesty's court are there no
knights?" "There are," replied Don Quixote, "and plenty of them; and
it is right there should be, to set off the dignity of the prince, and
for the greater glory of the king's majesty." "Then might not your
worship," said she, "be one of those that, without stirring a step,
serve their king and lord in his court?" "Recollect, my friend," said
Don Quixote, "all knights cannot be courtiers, nor can all courtiers
be knights-errant, nor need they be. There must be all sorts in the
world; and though we may be all knights, there is a great difference
between one and another; for the courtiers, without quitting their
chambers, or the threshold of the court, range the world over by
looking at a map, without its costing them a farthing, and without
suffering heat or cold, hunger or thirst; but we, the true
knights-errant, measure the whole earth with our own feet, exposed to
the sun, to the cold, to the air, to the inclemencies of heaven, by
day and night, on foot and on horseback; nor do we only know enemies
in pictures, but in their own real shapes; and at all risks and on all
occasions we attack them, without any regard to childish points or
rules of single combat, whether one has or has not a shorter lance or
sword, whether one carries relics or any secret contrivance about him,
whether or not the sun is to be divided and portioned out, and other
niceties of the sort that are observed in set combats of man to man,
that you know nothing about, but I do. And you must know besides, that
the true knight-errant, though he may see ten giants, that not only
touch the clouds with their heads but pierce them, and that go, each
of them, on two tall towers by way of legs, and whose arms are like
the masts of mighty ships, and each eye like a great mill-wheel, and
glowing brighter than a glass furnace, must not on any account be
dismayed by them. On the contrary, he must attack and fall upon them
with a gallant bearing and a fearless heart, and, if possible,
vanquish and destroy them, even though they have for armour the shells
of a certain fish, that they say are harder than diamonds, and in
place of swords wield trenchant blades of Damascus steel, or clubs
studded with spikes also of steel, such as I have more than once seen.
All this I say, housekeeper, that you may see the difference there is
between the one sort of knight and the other; and it would be well if
there were no prince who did not set a higher value on this second, or
more properly speaking first, kind of knights-errant; for, as we read
in their histories, there have been some among them who have been the
salvation, not merely of one kingdom, but of many." "Ah, senor," here
exclaimed the niece, "remember that all this you are saying about
knights-errant is fable and fiction; and their histories, if indeed
they were not burned, would deserve, each of them, to have a sambenito
put on it, or some mark by which it might be known as infamous and a
corrupter of good manners." "By the God that gives me life," said Don
Quixote, "if thou wert not my full niece, being daughter of my own
sister, I would inflict a chastisement upon thee for the blasphemy
thou hast uttered that all the world should ring with. What! can it be
that a young hussy that hardly knows how to handle a dozen
lace-bobbins dares to wag her tongue and criticise the histories of
knights-errant? What would Senor Amadis say if he heard of such a
thing? He, however, no doubt would forgive thee, for he was the most
humble-minded and courteous knight of his time, and moreover a great
protector of damsels; but some there are that might have heard thee,
and it would not have been well for thee in that case; for they are
not all courteous or mannerly; some are ill-conditioned scoundrels;
nor is it everyone that calls himself a gentleman, that is so in all
respects; some are gold, others pinchbeck, and all look like
gentlemen, but not all can stand the touchstone of truth. There are
men of low rank who strain themselves to bursting to pass for
gentlemen, and high gentlemen who, one would fancy, were dying to pass
for men of low rank; the former raise themselves by their ambition or
by their virtues, the latter debase themselves by their lack of spirit
or by their vices; and one has need of experience and discernment to
distinguish these two kinds of gentlemen, so much alike in name and so
different in conduct." "God bless me!" said the niece, "that you
should know so much, uncle--enough, if need be, to get up into a
pulpit and go preach in the streets--and yet that you should fall into
a delusion so great and a folly so manifest as to try to make yourself
out vigorous when you are old, strong when you are sickly, able to put
straight what is crooked when you yourself are bent by age, and, above
all, a caballero when you are not one; for though gentlefolk may be
so, poor men are nothing of the kind!" "There is a great deal of truth
in what you say, niece," returned Don Quixote, "and I could tell you
somewhat about birth that would astonish you; but, not to mix up
things human and divine, I refrain. Look you, my dears, all the
lineages in the world (attend to what I am saying) can be reduced to
four sorts, which are these: those that had humble beginnings, and
went on spreading and extending themselves until they attained
surpassing greatness; those that had great beginnings and maintained
them, and still maintain and uphold the greatness of their origin;
those, again, that from a great beginning have ended in a point like a
pyramid, having reduced and lessened their original greatness till it
has come to nought, like the point of a pyramid, which, relatively to
its base or foundation, is nothing; and then there are those--and it
is they that are the most numerous--that have had neither an
illustrious beginning nor a remarkable mid-course, and so will have an
end without a name, like an ordinary plebeian line. Of the first,
those that had an humble origin and rose to the greatness they still
preserve, the Ottoman house may serve as an example, which from an
humble and lowly shepherd, its founder, has reached the height at
which we now see it. For examples of the second sort of lineage, that
began with greatness and maintains it still without adding to it,
there are the many princes who have inherited the dignity, and
maintain themselves in their inheritance, without increasing or
diminishing it, keeping peacefully within the limits of their states.
Of those that began great and ended in a point, there are thousands of
examples, for all the Pharaohs and Ptolemies of Egypt, the Caesars of
Rome, and the whole herd (if I may such a word to them) of countless
princes, monarchs, lords, Medes, Assyrians, Persians, Greeks, and
barbarians, all these lineages and lordships have ended in a point and
come to nothing, they themselves as well as their founders, for it
would be impossible now to find one of their descendants, and, even
should we find one, it would be in some lowly and humble condition. Of
plebeian lineages I have nothing to say, save that they merely serve
to swell the number of those that live, without any eminence to
entitle them to any fame or praise beyond this. From all I have said I
would have you gather, my poor innocents, that great is the confusion
among lineages, and that only those are seen to be great and
illustrious that show themselves so by the virtue, wealth, and
generosity of their possessors. I have said virtue, wealth, and
generosity, because a great man who is vicious will be a great example
of vice, and a rich man who is not generous will be merely a miserly
beggar; for the possessor of wealth is not made happy by possessing
it, but by spending it, and not by spending as he pleases, but by
knowing how to spend it well. The poor gentleman has no way of showing
that he is a gentleman but by virtue, by being affable, well-bred,
courteous, gentle-mannered, and kindly, not haughty, arrogant, or
censorious, but above all by being charitable; for by two maravedis
given with a cheerful heart to the poor, he will show himself as
generous as he who distributes alms with bell-ringing, and no one that
perceives him to be endowed with the virtues I have named, even though
he know him not, will fail to recognise and set him down as one of
good blood; and it would be strange were it not so; praise has ever
been the reward of virtue, and those who are virtuous cannot fail to
receive commendation. There are two roads, my daughters, by which men
may reach wealth and honours; one is that of letters, the other that
of arms. I have more of arms than of letters in my composition, and,
judging by my inclination to arms, was born under the influence of the
planet Mars. I am, therefore, in a measure constrained to follow that
road, and by it I must travel in spite of all the world, and it will
be labour in vain for you to urge me to resist what heaven wills, fate
ordains, reason requires, and, above all, my own inclination favours;
for knowing as I do the countless toils that are the accompaniments of
knight-errantry, I know, too, the infinite blessings that are attained
by it; I know that the path of virtue is very narrow, and the road of
vice broad and spacious; I know their ends and goals are different,
for the broad and easy road of vice ends in death, and the narrow and
toilsome one of virtue in life, and not transitory life, but in that
which has no end; I know, as our great Castilian poet says, that-- It
is by rugged paths like these they go That scale the heights of
immortality, Unreached by those that falter here below." "Woe is me!"
exclaimed the niece, "my lord is a poet, too! He knows everything, and
he can do everything; I will bet, if he chose to turn mason, he could
make a house as easily as a cage." "I can tell you, niece," replied
Don Quixote, "if these chivalrous thoughts did not engage all my
faculties, there would be nothing that I could not do, nor any sort of
knickknack that would not come from my hands, particularly cages and
tooth-picks." At this moment there came a knocking at the door, and
when they asked who was there, Sancho Panza made answer that it was
he. The instant the housekeeper knew who it was, she ran to hide
herself so as not to see him; in such abhorrence did she hold him. The
niece let him in, and his master Don Quixote came forward to receive
him with open arms, and the pair shut themselves up in his room, where
they had another conversation not inferior to the previous one.
CHAPTER VII. OF WHAT PASSED BETWEEN DON QUIXOTE AND HIS SQUIRE,
TOGETHER WITH OTHER VERY NOTABLE INCIDENTS CHAPTER VIII WHEREIN IS
RELATED WHAT BEFELL DON QUIXOTE ON HIS WAY TO SEE HIS LADY DULCINEA
DEL TOBOSO "Blessed be Allah the all-powerful!" says Hamete Benengeli
on beginning this eighth chapter; "blessed be Allah!" he repeats three
times; and he says he utters these thanksgivings at seeing that he has
now got Don Quixote and Sancho fairly afield, and that the readers of
his delightful history may reckon that the achievements and humours of
Don Quixote and his squire are now about to begin; and he urges them
to forget the former chivalries of the ingenious gentleman and to fix
their eyes on those that are to come, which now begin on the road to
El Toboso, as the others began on the plains of Montiel; nor is it
much that he asks in consideration of all he promises, and so he goes
on to say: Don Quixote and Sancho were left alone, and the moment
Samson took his departure, Rocinante began to neigh, and Dapple to
sigh, which, by both knight and squire, was accepted as a good sign
and a very happy omen; though, if the truth is to be told, what I eat
in my corner without form or fuss has much more relish for me, even
though it be bread and onions, than the turkeys of those other tables
where I am forced to chew slowly, drink little, wipe my mouth every
minute, and cannot sneeze or cough if I want or do other things that
are the privileges of liberty and solitude. So, senor, as for these
honours which your worship would put upon me as a servant and follower
of knight-errantry, exchange them for other things which may be of
more use and advantage to me; for these, though I fully acknowledge
them as received, I renounce from this moment to the end of the
world." "For all that," said Don Quixote, "thou must seat thyself,
because him who humbleth himself God exalteth;" and seizing him by the
arm he forced him to sit down beside himself. The goatherds did not
understand this jargon about squires and knights-errant, and all they
did was to eat in silence and stare at their guests, who with great
elegance and appetite were stowing away pieces as big as one's fist.
The course of meat finished, they spread upon the sheepskins a great
heap of parched acorns, and with them they put down a half cheese
harder than if it had been made of mortar. All this while the horn was
not idle, for it went round so constantly, now full, now empty, like
the bucket of a water-wheel, that it soon drained one of the two
wine-skins that were in sight. When Don Quixote had quite appeased his
appetite he took up a handful of the acorns, and contemplating them
attentively delivered himself somewhat in this fashion: "Happy the
age, happy the time, to which the ancients gave the name of golden,
not because in that fortunate age the gold so coveted in this our iron
one was gained without toil, but because they that lived in it knew
not the two words "mine" and "thine"! In that blessed age all things
were in common; to win the daily food no labour was required of any
save to stretch forth his hand and gather it from the sturdy oaks that
stood generously inviting him with their sweet ripe fruit. The clear
streams and running brooks yielded their savoury limpid waters in
noble abundance. The busy and sagacious bees fixed their republic in
the clefts of the rocks and hollows of the trees, offering without
usance the plenteous produce of their fragrant toil to every hand. The
mighty cork trees, unenforced save of their own courtesy, shed the
broad light bark that served at first to roof the houses supported by
rude stakes, a protection against the inclemency of heaven alone. Then
all was peace, all friendship, all concord; as yet the dull share of
the crooked plough had not dared to rend and pierce the tender bowels
of our first mother that without compulsion yielded from every portion
of her broad fertile bosom all that could satisfy, sustain, and
delight the children that then possessed her. Then was it that the
innocent and fair young shepherdess roamed from vale to vale and hill
to hill, with flowing locks, and no more garments than were needful
modestly to cover what modesty seeks and ever sought to hide. Nor were
their ornaments like those in use to-day, set off by Tyrian purple,
and silk tortured in endless fashions, but the wreathed leaves of the
green dock and ivy, wherewith they went as bravely and becomingly
decked as our Court dames with all the rare and far-fetched artifices
that idle curiosity has taught them. Then the love-thoughts of the
heart clothed themselves simply and naturally as the heart conceived
them, nor sought to commend themselves by forced and rambling
verbiage. Fraud, deceit, or malice had then not yet mingled with truth
and sincerity. Justice held her ground, undisturbed and unassailed by
the efforts of favour and of interest, that now so much impair,
pervert, and beset her. Arbitrary law had not yet established itself
in the mind of the judge, for then there was no cause to judge and no
one to be judged. Maidens and modesty, as I have said, wandered at
will alone and unattended, without fear of insult from lawlessness or
libertine assault, and if they were undone it was of their own will
and pleasure. But now in this hateful age of ours not one is safe, not
though some new labyrinth like that of Crete conceal and surround her;
even there the pestilence of gallantry will make its way to them
through chinks or on the air by the zeal of its accursed importunity,
and, despite of all seclusion, lead them to ruin. In defence of these,
as time advanced and wickedness increased, the order of knights-errant
was instituted, to defend maidens, to protect widows and to succour
the orphans and the needy. To this order I belong, brother goatherds,
to whom I return thanks for the hospitality and kindly welcome ye
offer me and my squire; for though by natural law all living are bound
to show favour to knights-errant, yet, seeing that without knowing
this obligation ye have welcomed and feasted me, it is right that with
all the good-will in my power I should thank you for yours." All this
long harangue (which might very well have been spared) our knight
delivered because the acorns they gave him reminded him of the golden
age; and the whim seized him to address all this unnecessary argument
to the goatherds, who listened to him gaping in amazement without
saying a word in reply. Sancho likewise held his peace and ate acorns,
and paid repeated visits to the second wine-skin, which they had hung
up on a cork tree to keep the wine cool. Don Quixote was longer in
talking than the supper in finishing, at the end of which one of the
goatherds said, "That your worship, senor knight-errant, may say with
more truth that we show you hospitality with ready good-will, we will
give you amusement and pleasure by making one of our comrades sing: he
will be here before long, and he is a very intelligent youth and deep
in love, and what is more he can read and write and play on the rebeck
to perfection." The goatherd had hardly done speaking, when the notes
of the rebeck reached their ears; and shortly after, the player came
up, a very good-looking young man of about two-and-twenty. His
comrades asked him if he had supped, and on his replying that he had,
he who had already made the offer said to him: "In that case, Antonio,
thou mayest as well do us the pleasure of singing a little, that the
gentleman, our guest, may see that even in the mountains and woods
there are musicians: we have told him of thy accomplishments, and we
want thee to show them and prove that we say true; so, as thou livest,
pray sit down and sing that ballad about thy love that thy uncle the
prebendary made thee, and that was so much liked in the town." "With
all my heart," said the young man, and without waiting for more
pressing he seated himself on the trunk of a felled oak, and tuning
his rebeck, presently began to sing to these words. ANTONIO'S BALLAD
Thou dost love me well, Olalla; Well I know it, even though Love's
mute tongues, thine eyes, have never By their glances told me so. For
I know my love thou knowest, Therefore thine to claim I dare: Once it
ceases to be secret, Love need never feel despair. True it is, Olalla,
sometimes Thou hast all too plainly shown That thy heart is brass in
hardness, And thy snowy bosom stone. Yet for all that, in thy coyness,
And thy fickle fits between, Hope is there--at least the border Of her
garment may be seen. Lures to faith are they, those glimpses, And to
faith in thee I hold; Kindness cannot make it stronger, Coldness
cannot make it cold. If it be that love is gentle, In thy gentleness I
see Something holding out assurance To the hope of winning thee. If it
be that in devotion Lies a power hearts to move, That which every day
I show thee, Helpful to my suit should prove. Many a time thou must
have noticed-- If to notice thou dost care-- How I go about on Monday
Dressed in all my Sunday wear. Love's eyes love to look on brightness;
Love loves what is gaily drest; Sunday, Monday, all I care is Thou
shouldst see me in my best. No account I make of dances, Or of strains
that pleased thee so, Keeping thee awake from midnight Till the cocks
began to crow; Or of how I roundly swore it That there's none so fair
as thou; True it is, but as I said it, By the girls I'm hated now. For
Teresa of the hillside At my praise of thee was sore; Said, "You think
you love an angel; It's a monkey you adore; "Caught by all her
glittering trinkets, And her borrowed braids of hair, And a host of
made-up beauties That would Love himself ensnare." 'T was a lie, and
so I told her, And her cousin at the word Gave me his defiance for it;
And what followed thou hast heard. Mine is no high-flown affection,
Mine no passion par amours-- As they call it--what I offer Is an
honest love, and pure. Cunning cords the holy Church has, Cords of
softest silk they be; Put thy neck beneath the yoke, dear; Mine will
follow, thou wilt see. Else--and once for all I swear it By the saint
of most renown-- If I ever quit the mountains, 'T will be in a friar's
gown. Here the goatherd brought his song to an end, and though Don
Quixote entreated him to sing more, Sancho had no mind that way, being
more inclined for sleep than for listening to songs; so said he to his
master, "Your worship will do well to settle at once where you mean to
pass the night, for the labour these good men are at all day does not
allow them to spend the night in singing." "I understand thee,
Sancho," replied Don Quixote; "thou art dying to have the interdict I
placed upon thy tongue removed; consider it removed, and say what thou
wilt while we are wandering in these mountains." "So be it," said
Sancho; "let me speak now, for God knows what will happen by-and-by;
and to take advantage of the permit at once, I ask, what made your
worship stand up so for that Queen Majimasa, or whatever her name is,
or what did it matter whether that abbot was a friend of hers or not?
for if your worship had let that pass--and you were not a judge in the
matter--it is my belief the madman would have gone on with his story,
and the blow of the stone, and the kicks, and more than half a dozen
cuffs would have been escaped." "In faith, Sancho," answered Don
Quixote, "if thou knewest as I do what an honourable and illustrious
lady Queen Madasima was, I know thou wouldst say I had great patience
that I did not break in pieces the mouth that uttered such
blasphemies, for a very great blasphemy it is to say or imagine that a
queen has made free with a surgeon. The truth of the story is that
that Master Elisabad whom the madman mentioned was a man of great
prudence and sound judgment, and served as governor and physician to
the queen, but to suppose that she was his mistress is nonsense
deserving very severe punishment; and as a proof that Cardenio did not
know what he was saying, remember when he said it he was out of his
wits." "That is what I say," said Sancho; "there was no occasion for
minding the words of a madman; for if good luck had not helped your
worship, and he had sent that stone at your head instead of at your
breast, a fine way we should have been in for standing up for my lady
yonder, God confound her! And then, would not Cardenio have gone free
as a madman?" "Against men in their senses or against madmen," said
Don Quixote, "every knight-errant is bound to stand up for the honour
of women, whoever they may be, much more for queens of such high
degree and dignity as Queen Madasima, for whom I have a particular
regard on account of her amiable qualities; for, besides being
extremely beautiful, she was very wise, and very patient under her
misfortunes, of which she had many; and the counsel and society of the
Master Elisabad were a great help and support to her in enduring her
afflictions with wisdom and resignation; hence the ignorant and
ill-disposed vulgar took occasion to say and think that she was his
mistress; and they lie, I say it once more, and will lie two hundred
times more, all who think and say so." "I neither say nor think so,"
said Sancho; "let them look to it; with their bread let them eat it;
they have rendered account to God whether they misbehaved or not; I
come from my vineyard, I know nothing; I am not fond of prying into
other men's lives; he who buys and lies feels it in his purse;
moreover, naked was I born, naked I find myself, I neither lose nor
gain; but if they did, what is that to me? many think there are
flitches where there are no hooks; but who can put gates to the open
plain? moreover they said of God-" "God bless me," said Don Quixote,
"what a set of absurdities thou art stringing together! What has what
we are talking about got to do with the proverbs thou art threading
one after the other? for God's sake hold thy tongue, Sancho, and
henceforward keep to prodding thy ass and don't meddle in what does
not concern thee; and understand with all thy five senses that
everything I have done, am doing, or shall do, is well founded on
reason and in conformity with the rules of chivalry, for I understand
them better than all the world that profess them." "Senor," replied
Sancho, "is it a good rule of chivalry that we should go astray
through these mountains without path or road, looking for a madman who
when he is found will perhaps take a fancy to finish what he began,
not his story, but your worship's head and my ribs, and end by
breaking them altogether for us?" "Peace, I say again, Sancho," said
Don Quixote, "for let me tell thee it is not so much the desire of
finding that madman that leads me into these regions as that which I
have of performing among them an achievement wherewith I shall win
eternal name and fame throughout the known world; and it shall be such
that I shall thereby set the seal on all that can make a knight-errant
perfect and famous." "And is it very perilous, this achievement?"
"No," replied he of the Rueful Countenance; "though it may be in the
dice that we may throw deuce-ace instead of sixes; but all will depend
on thy diligence." "On my diligence!" said Sancho. "Yes," said Don
Quixote, "for if thou dost return soon from the place where I mean to
send thee, my penance will be soon over, and my glory will soon begin.
But as it is not right to keep thee any longer in suspense, waiting to
see what comes of my words, I would have thee know, Sancho, that in
this there is no condition more hazardous than that of adventurers."
"That is true," said Sancho, "since the mere noise of the hammers of a
fulling mill can disturb and disquiet the heart of such a valiant
errant adventurer as your worship; but you may be sure I will not open
my lips henceforward to make light of anything of your worship's, but
only to honour you as my master and natural lord." "By so doing,"
replied Don Quixote, "shalt thou live long on the face of the earth;
for next to parents, masters are to be respected as though they were
parents." CHAPTER XXI. WHICH TREATS OF THE EXALTED ADVENTURE AND RICH
PRIZE OF MAMBRINO'S HELMET, TOGETHER WITH OTHER THINGS THAT HAPPENED
TO OUR INVINCIBLE KNIGHT It now began to rain a little, and Sancho was
for going into the fulling mills, but Don Quixote had taken such an
abhorrence to them on account of the late joke that he would not enter
them on any account; so turning aside to right they came upon another
road, different from that which they had taken the night before.
Shortly afterwards Don Quixote perceived a man on horseback who wore
on his head something that shone like gold, and the moment he saw him
he turned to Sancho and said: "I think, Sancho, there is no proverb
that is not true, all being maxims drawn from experience itself, the
mother of all the sciences, especially that one that says, 'Where one
door shuts, another opens.' I say so because if last night fortune
shut the door of the adventure we were looking for against us,
cheating us with the fulling mills, it now opens wide another one for
another better and more certain adventure, and if I do not contrive to
enter it, it will be my own fault, and I cannot lay it to my ignorance
of fulling mills, or the darkness of the night. I say this because, if
I mistake not, there comes towards us one who wears on his head the
helmet of Mambrino, concerning which I took the oath thou
rememberest." "Mind what you say, your worship, and still more what
you do," said Sancho, "for I don't want any more fulling mills to
finish off fulling and knocking our senses out." "The devil take thee,
man," said Don Quixote; "what has a helmet to do with fulling mills?"
"I don't know," replied Sancho, "but, faith, if I might speak as I
used, perhaps I could give such reasons that your worship would see
you were mistaken in what you say." "How can I be mistaken in what I
say, unbelieving traitor?" returned Don Quixote; "tell me, seest thou
not yonder knight coming towards us on a dappled grey steed, who has
upon his head a helmet of gold?" "What I see and make out," answered
Sancho, "is only a man on a grey ass like my own, who has something
that shines on his head." "Well, that is the helmet of Mambrino," said
Don Quixote; "stand to one side and leave me alone with him; thou
shalt see how, without saying a word, to save time, I shall bring this
adventure to an issue and possess myself of the helmet I have so
longed for." "I will take care to stand aside," said Sancho; "but God
grant, I say once more, that it may be marjoram and not fulling
mills." "I have told thee, brother, on no account to mention those
fulling mills to me again," said Don Quixote, "or I vow--and I say no
more-I'll full the soul out of you." Sancho held his peace in dread
lest his master should carry out the vow he had hurled like a bowl at
him. The fact of the matter as regards the helmet, steed, and knight
that Don Quixote saw, was this. In that neighbourhood there were two
villages, one of them so small that it had neither apothecary's shop
nor barber, which the other that was close to it had, so the barber of
the larger served the smaller, and in it there was a sick man who
required to be bled and another man who wanted to be shaved, and on
this errand the barber was going, carrying with him a brass basin; but
as luck would have it, as he was on the way it began to rain, and not
to spoil his hat, which probably was a new one, he put the basin on
his head, and being clean it glittered at half a league's distance. He
rode upon a grey ass, as Sancho said, and this was what made it seem
to Don Quixote to be a dapple-grey steed and a knight and a golden
helmet; for everything he saw he made to fall in with his crazy
chivalry and ill-errant notions; and when he saw the poor knight draw
near, without entering into any parley with him, at Rocinante's top
speed he bore down upon him with the pike pointed low, fully
determined to run him through and through, and as he reached him,
without checking the fury of his charge, he cried to him: "Defend
thyself, miserable being, or yield me of thine own accord that which
is so reasonably my due." The barber, who without any expectation or
apprehension of it saw this apparition coming down upon him, had no
other way of saving himself from the stroke of the lance but to let
himself fall off his ass; and no sooner had he touched the ground than
he sprang up more nimbly than a deer and sped away across the plain
faster than the wind. He left the basin on the ground, with which Don
Quixote contented himself, saying that the pagan had shown his
discretion and imitated the beaver, which finding itself pressed by
the hunters bites and cuts off with its teeth that for which, by its
natural instinct, it knows it is pursued. He told Sancho to pick up
the helmet, and he taking it in his hands said: "By God the basin is a
good one, and worth a real of eight if it is worth a maravedis," and
handed it to his master, who immediately put it on his head, turning
it round, now this way, now that, in search of fitment, and not
finding it he said, "Clearly the pagan to whose measure this famous
head-piece was first forged must have had a very large head; but the
worst of it is half of it is wanting." When Sancho heard him call the
basin a headpiece he was unable to restrain his laughter, but
remembering his master's wrath he checked himself in the midst of it.
"What art thou laughing at, Sancho?" said Don Quixote. "I am
laughing," said he, "to think of the great head the pagan must have
had who owned this helmet, for it looks exactly like a regular
barber's basin." "Dost thou know what I suspect, Sancho?" said Don
Quixote; "that this wonderful piece of this enchanted helmet must by
some strange accident have come into the hands of some one who was
unable to recognise or realise its value, and who, not knowing what he
did, and seeing it to be of the purest gold, must have melted down one
half for the sake of what it might be worth, and of the other made
this which is like a barber's basin as thou sayest; but be it as it
may, to me who recognise it, its transformation makes no difference,
for I will set it to rights at the first village where there is a
blacksmith, and in such style that that helmet the god of smithies
forged for the god of battles shall not surpass it or even come up to
it; and in the meantime I will wear it as well as I can, for something
is better than nothing; all the more as it will be quite enough to
protect me from any chance blow of a stone." "That is," said Sancho,
"if it is not shot with a sling as they were in the battle of the two
armies, when they signed the cross on your worship's grinders and
smashed the flask with that blessed draught that made me vomit my
bowels up." "It does not grieve me much to have lost it," said Don
Quixote, "for thou knowest, Sancho, that I have the receipt in my
memory." "So have I," answered Sancho, "but if ever I make it, or try
it again as long as I live, may this be my last hour; moreover, I have
no intention of putting myself in the way of wanting it, for I mean,
with all my five senses, to keep myself from being wounded or from
wounding anyone: as to being blanketed again I say nothing, for it is
hard to prevent mishaps of that sort, and if they come there is
nothing for it but to squeeze our shoulders together, hold our breath,
shut our eyes, and let ourselves go where luck and the blanket may
send us." "Thou art a bad Christian, Sancho," said Don Quixote on
hearing this, "for once an injury has been done thee thou never
forgettest it: but know that it is the part of noble and generous
hearts not to attach importance to trifles. What lame leg hast thou
got by it, what broken rib, what cracked head, that thou canst not
forget that jest? For jest and sport it was, properly regarded, and
had I not seen it in that light I would have returned and done more
mischief in revenging thee than the Greeks did for the rape of Helen,
who, if she were alive now, or if my Dulcinea had lived then, might
depend upon it she would not be so famous for her beauty as she is;"
and here he heaved a sigh and sent it aloft; and said Sancho, "Let it
pass for a jest as it cannot be revenged in earnest, but I know what
sort of jest and earnest it was, and I know it will never be rubbed
out of my memory any more than off my shoulders. But putting that
aside, will your worship tell me what are we to do with this
dapple-grey steed that looks like a grey ass, which that Martino that
your worship overthrew has left deserted here? for, from the way he
took to his heels and bolted, he is not likely ever to come back for
it; and by my beard but the grey is a good one." "I have never been in
the habit," said Don Quixote, "of taking spoil of those whom I
vanquish, nor is it the practice of chivalry to take away their horses
and leave them to go on foot, unless indeed it be that the victor have
lost his own in the combat, in which case it is lawful to take that of
the vanquished as a thing won in lawful war; therefore, Sancho, leave
this horse, or ass, or whatever thou wilt have it to be; for when its
owner sees us gone hence he will come back for it." "God knows I
should like to take it," returned Sancho, "or at least to change it
for my own, which does not seem to me as good a one: verily the laws
of chivalry are strict, since they cannot be stretched to let one ass
be changed for another; I should like to know if I might at least
change trappings." "On that head I am not quite certain," answered Don
Quixote, "and the matter being doubtful, pending better information, I
say thou mayest change them, if so be thou hast urgent need of them."
"So urgent is it," answered Sancho, "that if they were for my own
person I could not want them more;" and forthwith, fortified by this
licence, he effected the mutatio capparum, rigging out his beast to
the ninety-nines and making quite another thing of it. This done, they
broke their fast on the remains of the spoils of war plundered from
the sumpter mule, and drank of the brook that flowed from the fulling
mills, without casting a look in that direction, in such loathing did
they hold them for the alarm they had caused them; and, all anger and
gloom removed, they mounted and, without taking any fixed road (not to
fix upon any being the proper thing for true knights-errant), they set
out, guided by Rocinante's will, which carried along with it that of
his master, not to say that of the ass, which always followed him
wherever he led, lovingly and sociably; nevertheless they returned to
the high road, and pursued it at a venture without any other aim. As
they went along, then, in this way Sancho said to his master, "Senor,
would your worship give me leave to speak a little to you? For since
you laid that hard injunction of silence on me several things have
gone to rot in my stomach, and I have now just one on the tip of my
tongue that I don't want to be spoiled." "Say, on, Sancho," said Don
Quixote, "and be brief in thy discourse, for there is no pleasure in
one that is long." "Well then, senor," returned Sancho, "I say that
for some days past I have been considering how little is got or gained
by going in search of these adventures that your worship seeks in
these wilds and cross-roads, where, even if the most perilous are
victoriously achieved, there is no one to see or know of them, and so
they must be left untold for ever, to the loss of your worship's
object and the credit they deserve; therefore it seems to me it would
be better (saving your worship's better judgment) if we were to go and
serve some emperor or other great prince who may have some war on
hand, in whose service your worship may prove the worth of your
person, your great might, and greater understanding, on perceiving
which the lord in whose service we may be will perforce have to reward
us, each according to his merits; and there you will not be at a loss
for some one to set down your achievements in writing so as to
preserve their memory for ever. Of my own I say nothing, as they will
not go beyond squirely limits, though I make bold to say that, if it
be the practice in chivalry to write the achievements of squires, I
think mine must not be left out." "Thou speakest not amiss, Sancho,"
answered Don Quixote, "but before that point is reached it is
requisite to roam the world, as it were on probation, seeking
adventures, in order that, by achieving some, name and fame may be
acquired, such that when he betakes himself to the court of some great
monarch the knight may be already known by his deeds, and that the
boys, the instant they see him enter the gate of the city, may all
follow him and surround him, crying, 'This is the Knight of the
Sun'-or the Serpent, or any other title under which he may have
achieved great deeds. 'This,' they will say, 'is he who vanquished in
single combat the gigantic Brocabruno of mighty strength; he who
delivered the great Mameluke of Persia out of the long enchantment
under which he had been for almost nine hundred years.' So from one to
another they will go proclaiming his achievements; and presently at
the tumult of the boys and the others the king of that kingdom will
appear at the windows of his royal palace, and as soon as he beholds
the knight, recognising him by his arms and the device on his shield,
he will as a matter of course say, 'What ho! Forth all ye, the knights
of my court, to receive the flower of chivalry who cometh hither!' At
which command all will issue forth, and he himself, advancing half-way
down the stairs, will embrace him closely, and salute him, kissing him
on the cheek, and will then lead him to the queen's chamber, where the
knight will find her with the princess her daughter, who will be one
of the most beautiful and accomplished damsels that could with the
utmost pains be discovered anywhere in the known world. Straightway it
will come to pass that she will fix her eyes upon the knight and he
his upon her, and each will seem to the other something more divine
than human, and, without knowing how or why they will be taken and
entangled in the inextricable toils of love, and sorely distressed in
their hearts not to see any way of making their pains and sufferings
known by speech. Thence they will lead him, no doubt, to some richly
adorned chamber of the palace, where, having removed his armour, they
will bring him a rich mantle of scarlet wherewith to robe himself, and
if he looked noble in his armour he will look still more so in a
doublet. When night comes he will sup with the king, queen, and
princess; and all the time he will never take his eyes off her,
stealing stealthy glances, unnoticed by those present, and she will do
the same, and with equal cautiousness, being, as I have said, a damsel
of great discretion. The tables being removed, suddenly through the
door of the hall there will enter a hideous and diminutive dwarf
followed by a fair dame, between two giants, who comes with a certain
adventure, the work of an ancient sage; and he who shall achieve it
shall be deemed the best knight in the world. "The king will then
command all those present to essay it, and none will bring it to an
end and conclusion save the stranger knight, to the great enhancement
of his fame, whereat the princess will be overjoyed and will esteem
herself happy and fortunate in having fixed and placed her thoughts so
high. And the best of it is that this king, or prince, or whatever he
is, is engaged in a very bitter war with another as powerful as
himself, and the stranger knight, after having been some days at his
court, requests leave from him to go and serve him in the said war.
The king will grant it very readily, and the knight will courteously
kiss his hands for the favour done to him; and that night he will take
leave of his lady the princess at the grating of the chamber where she
sleeps, which looks upon a garden, and at which he has already many
times conversed with her, the go-between and confidante in the matter
being a damsel much trusted by the princess. He will sigh, she will
swoon, the damsel will fetch water, much distressed because morning
approaches, and for the honour of her lady he would not that they were
discovered; at last the princess will come to herself and will present
her white hands through the grating to the knight, who will kiss them
a thousand and a thousand times, bathing them with his tears. It will
be arranged between them how they are to inform each other of their
good or evil fortunes, and the princess will entreat him to make his
absence as short as possible, which he will promise to do with many
oaths; once more he kisses her hands, and takes his leave in such
grief that he is well-nigh ready to die. He betakes him thence to his
chamber, flings himself on his bed, cannot sleep for sorrow at
parting, rises early in the morning, goes to take leave of the king,
queen, and princess, and, as he takes his leave of the pair, it is
told him that the princess is indisposed and cannot receive a visit;
the knight thinks it is from grief at his departure, his heart is
pierced, and he is hardly able to keep from showing his pain. The
confidante is present, observes all, goes to tell her mistress, who
listens with tears and says that one of her greatest distresses is not
knowing who this knight is, and whether he is of kingly lineage or
not; the damsel assures her that so much courtesy, gentleness, and
gallantry of bearing as her knight possesses could not exist in any
save one who was royal and illustrious; her anxiety is thus relieved,
and she strives to be of good cheer lest she should excite suspicion
in her parents, and at the end of two days she appears in public.
Meanwhile the knight has taken his departure; he fights in the war,
conquers the king's enemy, wins many cities, triumphs in many battles,
returns to the court, sees his lady where he was wont to see her, and
it is agreed that he shall demand her in marriage of her parents as
the reward of his services; the king is unwilling to give her, as he
knows not who he is, but nevertheless, whether carried off or in
whatever other way it may be, the princess comes to be his bride, and
her father comes to regard it as very good fortune; for it so happens
that this knight is proved to be the son of a valiant king of some
kingdom, I know not what, for I fancy it is not likely to be on the
map. The father dies, the princess inherits, and in two words the
knight becomes king. And here comes in at once the bestowal of rewards
upon his squire and all who have aided him in rising to so exalted a
rank. He marries his squire to a damsel of the princess's, who will
be, no doubt, the one who was confidante in their amour, and is
daughter of a very great duke." "That's what I want, and no mistake
about it!" said Sancho. "That's what I'm waiting for; for all this,
word for word, is in store for your worship under the title of the
Knight of the Rueful Countenance." "Thou needst not doubt it, Sancho,"
replied Don Quixote, "for in the same manner, and by the same steps as
I have described here, knights-errant rise and have risen to be kings
and emperors; all we want now is to find out what king, Christian or
pagan, is at war and has a beautiful daughter; but there will be time
enough to think of that, for, as I have told thee, fame must be won in
other quarters before repairing to the court. There is another thing,
too, that is wanting; for supposing we find a king who is at war and
has a beautiful daughter, and that I have won incredible fame
throughout the universe, I know not how it can be made out that I am
of royal lineage, or even second cousin to an emperor; for the king
will not be willing to give me his daughter in marriage unless he is
first thoroughly satisfied on this point, however much my famous deeds
may deserve it; so that by this deficiency I fear I shall lose what my
arm has fairly earned. True it is I am a gentleman of known house, of
estate and property, and entitled to the five hundred sueldos mulct;
and it may be that the sage who shall write my history will so clear
up my ancestry and pedigree that I may find myself fifth or sixth in
descent from a king; for I would have thee know, Sancho, that wounds
caused by any instruments which happen by chance to be in hand inflict
no indignity, and this is laid down in the law of the duel in express
words: if, for instance, the cobbler strikes another with the last
which he has in his hand, though it be in fact a piece of wood, it
cannot be said for that reason that he whom he struck with it has been
cudgelled. I say this lest thou shouldst imagine that because we have
been drubbed in this affray we have therefore suffered any indignity;
for the arms those men carried, with which they pounded us, were
nothing more than their stakes, and not one of them, so far as I
remember, carried rapier, sword, or dagger." "They gave me no time to
see that much," answered Sancho, "for hardly had I laid hand on my
tizona when they signed the cross on my shoulders with their sticks in
such style that they took the sight out of my eyes and the strength
out of my feet, stretching me where I now lie, and where thinking of
whether all those stake-strokes were an indignity or not gives me no
uneasiness, which the pain of the blows does, for they will remain as
deeply impressed on my memory as on my shoulders." "For all that let
me tell thee, brother Panza," said Don Quixote, "that there is no
recollection which time does not put an end to, and no pain which
death does not remove." "And what greater misfortune can there be,"
replied Panza, "than the one that waits for time to put an end to it
and death to remove it? If our mishap were one of those that are cured
with a couple of plasters, it would not be so bad; but thou hast the
gift of making fools and blockheads of all who have anything to do
with thee or say to thee. Why, look at these gentlemen bearing thee
company! Get thee home, blockhead, and see after thy affairs, and thy
wife and children, and give over these fooleries that are sapping thy
brains and skimming away thy wits." "Go your own way, brother," said
Don Antonio, "and don't offer advice to those who don't ask you for
it. Senor Don Quixote is in his full senses, and we who bear him
company are not fools; virtue is to be honoured wherever it may be
found; go, and bad luck to you, and don't meddle where you are not
wanted." "By God, your worship is right," replied the Castilian; "for
to advise this good man is to kick against the pricks; still for all
that it fills me with pity that the sound wit they say the blockhead
has in everything should dribble away by the channel of his
knight-errantry; but may the bad luck your worship talks of follow me
and all my descendants, if, from this day forth, though I should live
longer than Methuselah, I ever give advice to anybody even if he asks
me for it." The advice-giver took himself off, and they continued
their stroll; but so great was the press of the boys and people to
read the placard, that Don Antonio was forced to remove it as if he
were taking off something else. Night came and they went home, and
there was a ladies' dancing party, for Don Antonio's wife, a lady of
rank and gaiety, beauty and wit, had invited some friends of hers to
come and do honour to her guest and amuse themselves with his strange
delusions. Several of them came, they supped sumptuously, the dance
began at about ten o'clock. Among the ladies were two of a mischievous
and frolicsome turn, and, though perfectly modest, somewhat free in
playing tricks for harmless diversion sake. These two were so
indefatigable in taking Don Quixote out to dance that they tired him
down, not only in body but in spirit. It was a sight to see the figure
Don Quixote made, long, lank, lean, and yellow, his garments clinging
tight to him, ungainly, and above all anything but agile. The gay
ladies made secret love to him, and he on his part secretly repelled
them, but finding himself hard pressed by their blandishments he
lifted up his voice and exclaimed, "Fugite, partes adversae! Leave me
in peace, unwelcome overtures; avaunt, with your desires, ladies, for
she who is queen of mine, the peerless Dulcinea del Toboso, suffers
none but hers to lead me captive and subdue me;" and so saying he sat
down on the floor in the middle of the room, tired out and broken down
by all this exertion in the dance. Don Antonio directed him to be
taken up bodily and carried to bed, and the first that laid hold of
him was Sancho, saying as he did so, "In an evil hour you took to
dancing, master mine; do you fancy all mighty men of valour are
dancers, and all knights-errant given to capering? If you do, I can
tell you you are mistaken; there's many a man would rather undertake
to kill a giant than cut a caper. If it had been the shoe-fling you
were at I could take your place, for I can do the shoe-fling like a
gerfalcon; but I'm no good at dancing." With these and other
observations Sancho set the whole ball-room laughing, and then put his
master to bed, covering him up well so that he might sweat out any
chill caught after his dancing. The next day Don Antonio thought he
might as well make trial of the enchanted head, and with Don Quixote,
Sancho, and two others, friends of his, besides the two ladies that
had tired out Don Quixote at the ball, who had remained for the night
with Don Antonio's wife, he locked himself up in the chamber where the
head was. He explained to them the property it possessed and entrusted
the secret to them, telling them that now for the first time he was
going to try the virtue of the enchanted head; but except Don
Antonio's two friends no one else was privy to the mystery of the
enchantment, and if Don Antonio had not first revealed it to them they
would have been inevitably reduced to the same state of amazement as
the rest, so artfully and skilfully was it contrived. The first to
approach the ear of the head was Don Antonio himself, and in a low
voice but not so low as not to be audible to all, he said to it,
"Head, tell me by the virtue that lies in thee what am I at this
moment thinking of?" The head, without any movement of the lips,
answered in a clear and distinct voice, so as to be heard by all, "I
cannot judge of thoughts." All were thunderstruck at this, and all the
more so as they saw that there was nobody anywhere near the table or
in the whole room that could have answered. "How many of us are here?"
asked Don Antonio once more; and it was answered him in the same way
softly, "Thou and thy wife, with two friends of thine and two of hers,
and a famous knight called Don Quixote of La Mancha, and a squire of
his, Sancho Panza by name." Now there was fresh astonishment; now
everyone's hair was standing on end with awe; and Don Antonio retiring
from the head exclaimed, "This suffices to show me that I have not
been deceived by him who sold thee to me, O sage head, talking head,
answering head, wonderful head! Let some one else go and put what
question he likes to it." And as women are commonly impulsive and
inquisitive, the first to come forward was one of the two friends of
Don Antonio's wife, and her question was, "Tell me, Head, what shall I
do to be very beautiful?" and the answer she got was, "Be very
modest." "I question thee no further," said the fair querist. Her
companion then came up and said, "I should like to know, Head, whether
my husband loves me or not;" the answer given to her was, "Think how
he uses thee, and thou mayest guess;" and the married lady went off
saying, "That answer did not need a question; for of course the
treatment one receives shows the disposition of him from whom it is
received." Then one of Don Antonio's two friends advanced and asked
it, "Who am I?" "Thou knowest," was the answer. "That is not what I
ask thee," said the gentleman, "but to tell me if thou knowest me."
"Yes, I know thee, thou art Don Pedro Noriz," was the reply. "I do not
seek to know more," said the gentleman, "for this is enough to
convince me, O Head, that thou knowest everything;" and as he retired
the other friend came forward and asked it, "Tell me, Head, what are
the wishes of my eldest son?" "I have said already," was the answer,
"that I cannot judge of wishes; however, I can tell thee the wish of
thy son is to bury thee." "That's 'what I see with my eyes I point out
with my finger,'" said the gentleman, "so I ask no more." Don
Antonio's wife came up and said, "I know not what to ask thee, Head; I
would only seek to know of thee if I shall have many years of
enjoyment of my good husband;" and the answer she received was, "Thou
shalt, for his vigour and his temperate habits promise many years of
life, which by their intemperance others so often cut short." Then Don
Quixote came forward and said, "Tell me, thou that answerest, was that
which I describe as having happened to me in the cave of Montesinos
the truth or a dream? Will Sancho's whipping be accomplished without
fail? Will the disenchantment of Dulcinea be brought about?" "As to
the question of the cave," was the reply, "there is much to be said;
there is something of both in it. Sancho's whipping will proceed
leisurely. The disenchantment of Dulcinea will attain its due
consummation." "I seek to know no more," said Don Quixote; "let me but
see Dulcinea disenchanted, and I will consider that all the good
fortune I could wish for has come upon me all at once." The last
questioner was Sancho, and his questions were, "Head, shall I by any
chance have another government? Shall I ever escape from the hard life
of a squire? Shall I get back to see my wife and children?" To which
the answer came, "Thou shalt govern in thy house; and if thou
returnest to it thou shalt see thy wife and children; and on ceasing
to serve thou shalt cease to be a squire." "Good, by God!" said Sancho
Panza; "I could have told myself that; the prophet Perogrullo could
have said no more." "What answer wouldst thou have, beast?" said Don
Quixote; "is it not enough that the replies this head has given suit
the questions put to it?" "Yes, it is enough," said Sancho; "but I
should have liked it to have made itself plainer and told me more."
The questions and answers came to an end here, but not the wonder with
which all were filled, except Don Antonio's two friends who were in
the secret. This Cide Hamete Benengeli thought fit to reveal at once,
not to keep the world in suspense, fancying that the head had some
strange magical mystery in it. He says, therefore, that on the model
of another head, the work of an image maker, which he had seen at
Madrid, Don Antonio made this one at home for his own amusement and to
astonish ignorant people; and its mechanism was as follows. The table
was of wood painted and varnished to imitate jasper, and the pedestal
on which it stood was of the same material, with four eagles' claws
projecting from it to support the weight more steadily. The head,
which resembled a bust or figure of a Roman emperor, and was coloured
like bronze, was hollow throughout, as was the table, into which it
was fitted so exactly that no trace of the joining was visible. The
pedestal of the table was also hollow and communicated with the throat
and neck of the head, and the whole was in communication with another
room underneath the chamber in which the head stood. Through the
entire cavity in the pedestal, table, throat and neck of the bust or
figure, there passed a tube of tin carefully adjusted and concealed
from sight. In the room below corresponding to the one above was
placed the person who was to answer, with his mouth to the tube, and
the voice, as in an ear-trumpet, passed from above downwards, and from
below upwards, the words coming clearly and distinctly; it was
impossible, thus, to detect the trick. A nephew of Don Antonio's, a
smart sharp-witted student, was the answerer, and as he had been told
beforehand by his uncle who the persons were that would come with him
that day into the chamber where the head was, it was an easy matter
for him to answer the first question at once and correctly; the others
he answered by guess-work, and, being clever, cleverly. Cide Hamete
adds that this marvellous contrivance stood for some ten or twelve
days; but that, as it became noised abroad through the city that he
had in his house an enchanted head that answered all who asked
questions of it, Don Antonio, fearing it might come to the ears of the
watchful sentinels of our faith, explained the matter to the
inquisitors, who commanded him to break it up and have done with it,
lest the ignorant vulgar should be scandalised. By Don Quixote,
however, and by Sancho the head was still held to be an enchanted one,
and capable of answering questions, though more to Don Quixote's
satisfaction than Sancho's. The gentlemen of the city, to gratify Don
Antonio and also to do the honours to Don Quixote, and give him an
opportunity of displaying his folly, made arrangements for a tilting
at the ring in six days from that time, which, however, for reason
that will be mentioned hereafter, did not take place. Don Quixote took
a fancy to stroll about the city quietly and on foot, for he feared
that if he went on horseback the boys would follow him; so he and
Sancho and two servants that Don Antonio gave him set out for a walk.
Thus it came to pass that going along one of the streets Don Quixote
lifted up his eyes and saw written in very large letters over a door,
"Books printed here," at which he was vastly pleased, for until then
he had never seen a printing office, and he was curious to know what
it was like. He entered with all his following, and saw them drawing
sheets in one place, correcting in another, setting up type here,
revising there; in short all the work that is to be seen in great
printing offices. He went up to one case and asked what they were
about there; the workmen told him, he watched them with wonder, and
passed on. He approached one man, among others, and asked him what he
was doing. The workman replied, "Senor, this gentleman here" (pointing
to a man of prepossessing appearance and a certain gravity of look)
"has translated an Italian book into our Spanish tongue, and I am
setting it up in type for the press." "What is the title of the book?"
asked Don Quixote; to which the author replied, "Senor, in Italian the
book is called Le Bagatelle." "And what does Le Bagatelle import in
our Spanish?" asked Don Quixote. "Le Bagatelle," said the author, "is
as though we should say in Spanish Los Juguetes; but though the book
is humble in name it has good solid matter in it." "I," said Don
Quixote, "have some little smattering of Italian, and I plume myself
on singing some of Ariosto's stanzas; but tell me, senor--I do not say
this to test your ability, but merely out of curiosity--have you ever
met with the word pignatta in your book?" "Yes, often," said the
author. "And how do you render that in Spanish?" "How should I render
it," returned the author, "but by olla?" "Body o' me," exclaimed Don
Quixote, "what a proficient you are in the Italian language! I would
lay a good wager that where they say in Italian piace you say in
Spanish place, and where they say piu you say mas, and you translate
su by arriba and giu by abajo." "I translate them so of course," said
the author, "for those are their proper equivalents." "I would venture
to swear," said Don Quixote, "that your worship is not known in the
world, which always begrudges their reward to rare wits and
praiseworthy labours. What talents lie wasted there! What genius
thrust away into corners! What worth left neglected! Still it seems to
me that translation from one language into another, if it be not from
the queens of languages, the Greek and the Latin, is like looking at
Flemish tapestries on the wrong side; for though the figures are
visible, they are full of threads that make them indistinct, and they
do not show with the smoothness and brightness of the right side; and
translation from easy languages argues neither ingenuity nor command
of words, any more than transcribing or copying out one document from
another. But I do not mean by this to draw the inference that no
credit is to be allowed for the work of translating, for a man may
employ himself in ways worse and less profitable to himself. This
estimate does not include two famous translators, Doctor Cristobal de
Figueroa, in his Pastor Fido, and Don Juan de Jauregui, in his Aminta,
wherein by their felicity they leave it in doubt which is the
translation and which the original. But tell me, are you printing this
book at your own risk, or have you sold the copyright to some
bookseller?" "I print at my own risk," said the author, "and I expect
to make a thousand ducats at least by this first edition, which is to
be of two thousand copies that will go off in a twinkling at six reals
apiece." "A fine calculation you are making!" said Don Quixote; "it is
plain you don't know the ins and outs of the printers, and how they
play into one another's hands. I promise you when you find yourself
saddled with two thousand copies you will feel so sore that it will
astonish you, particularly if the book is a little out of the common
and not in any way highly spiced." "What!" said the author, "would
your worship, then, have me give it to a bookseller who will give
three maravedis for the copyright and think he is doing me a favour? I
do not print my books to win fame in the world, for I am known in it
already by my works; I want to make money, without which reputation is
not worth a rap." "God send your worship good luck," said Don Quixote;
and he moved on to another case, where he saw them correcting a sheet
of a book with the title of "Light of the Soul;" noticing it he
observed, "Books like this, though there are many of the kind, are the
ones that deserve to be printed, for many are the sinners in these
days, and lights unnumbered are needed for all that are in darkness."
He passed on, and saw they were also correcting another book, and when
he asked its title they told him it was called, "The Second Part of
the Ingenious Gentleman Don Quixote of La Mancha," by one of
Tordesillas. "I have heard of this book already," said Don Quixote,
"and verily and on my conscience I thought it had been by this time
burned to ashes as a meddlesome intruder; but its Martinmas will come
to it as it does to every pig; for fictions have the more merit and
charm about them the more nearly they approach the truth or what looks
like it; and true stories, the truer they are the better they are;"
and so saying he walked out of the printing office with a certain
amount of displeasure in his looks. That same day Don Antonio arranged
to take him to see the galleys that lay at the beach, whereat Sancho
was in high delight, as he had never seen any all his life. Don
Antonio sent word to the commandant of the galleys that he intended to
bring his guest, the famous Don Quixote of La Mancha, otherwise called
the Knight of the Lions, for whom, by the disposition of heaven above,
it is reserved to give a happy issue to this adventure;" and so saying
he drew his sword and began making passes in the air at the millers,
who, hearing but not understanding all this nonsense, strove to stop
the boat, which was now getting into the rushing channel of the
wheels. Sancho fell upon his knees devoutly appealing to heaven to
deliver him from such imminent peril; which it did by the activity and
quickness of the millers, who, pushing against the boat with their
poles, stopped it, not, however, without upsetting and throwing Don
Quixote and Sancho into the water; and lucky it was for Don Quixote
that he could swim like a goose, though the weight of his armour
carried him twice to the bottom; and had it not been for the millers,
who plunged in and hoisted them both out, it would have been Troy town
with the pair of them. As soon as, more drenched than thirsty, they
were landed, Sancho went down on his knees and with clasped hands and
eyes raised to heaven, prayed a long and fervent prayer to God to
deliver him evermore from the rash projects and attempts of his
master. The fishermen, the owners of the boat, which the mill-wheels
had knocked to pieces, now came up, and seeing it smashed they
proceeded to strip Sancho and to demand payment for it from Don
Quixote; but he with great calmness, just as if nothing had happened
him, told the millers and fishermen that he would pay for the bark
most cheerfully, on condition that they delivered up to him, free and
unhurt, the person or persons that were in durance in that castle of
theirs. "What persons or what castle art thou talking of, madman? Art
thou for carrying off the people who come to grind corn in these
mills?" "That's enough," said Don Quixote to himself, "it would be
preaching in the desert to attempt by entreaties to induce this rabble
to do any virtuous action. In this adventure two mighty enchanters
must have encountered one another, and one frustrates what the other
attempts; one provided the bark for me, and the other upset me; God
help us, this world is all machinations and schemes at cross purposes
one with the other. I can do no more." And then turning towards the
mills he said aloud, "Friends, whoe'er ye be that are immured in that
prison, forgive me that, to my misfortune and yours, I cannot deliver
you from your misery; this adventure is doubtless reserved and
destined for some other knight." So saying he settled with the
fishermen, and paid fifty reals for the boat, which Sancho handed to
them very much against the grain, saying, "With a couple more bark
businesses like this we shall have sunk our whole capital." The
fishermen and the millers stood staring in amazement at the two
figures, so very different to all appearance from ordinary men, and
were wholly unable to make out the drift of the observations and
questions Don Quixote addressed to them; and coming to the conclusion
that they were madmen, they left them and betook themselves, the
millers to their mills, and the fishermen to their huts. Don Quixote
and Sancho returned to their beasts, and to their life of beasts, and
so ended the adventure of the enchanted bark. CHAPTER XXX. OF DON
QUIXOTE'S ADVENTURE WITH A FAIR HUNTRESS They reached their beasts in
low spirits and bad humour enough, knight and squire, Sancho
particularly, for with him what touched the stock of money touched his
heart, and when any was taken from him he felt as if he was robbed of
the apples of his eyes. In fine, without exchanging a word, they
mounted and quitted the famous river, Don Quixote absorbed in thoughts
of his love, Sancho in thinking of his advancement, which just then,
it seemed to him, he was very far from securing; for, fool as he was,
he saw clearly enough that his master's acts were all or most of them
utterly senseless; and he began to cast about for an opportunity of
retiring from his service and going home some day, without entering
into any explanations or taking any farewell of him. Fortune, however,
ordered matters after a fashion very much the opposite of what he
contemplated. It so happened that the next day towards sunset, on
coming out of a wood, Don Quixote cast his eyes over a green meadow,
and at the far end of it observed some people, and as he drew nearer
saw that it was a hawking party. Coming closer, he distinguished among
them a lady of graceful mien, on a pure white palfrey or hackney
caparisoned with green trappings and a silver-mounted side-saddle. The
lady was also in green, and so richly and splendidly dressed that
splendour itself seemed personified in her. On her left hand she bore
a hawk, a proof to Don Quixote's mind that she must be some great lady
and the mistress of the whole hunting party, which was the fact; so he
said to Sancho, "Run Sancho, my son, and say to that lady on the
palfrey with the hawk that I, the Knight of the Lions, kiss the hands
of her exalted beauty, and if her excellence will grant me leave I
will go and kiss them in person and place myself at her service for
aught that may be in my power and her highness may command; and mind,
Sancho, how thou speakest, and take care not to thrust in any of thy
proverbs into thy message." "You've got a likely one here to thrust
any in!" said Sancho; "leave me alone for that! Why, this is not the
first time in my life I have carried messages to high and exalted
ladies." "Except that thou didst carry to the lady Dulcinea," said Don
Quixote, "I know not that thou hast carried any other, at least in my
service." "That is true," replied Sancho; "but pledges don't distress
a good payer, and in a house where there's plenty supper is soon
cooked; I mean there's no need of telling or warning me about
anything; for I'm ready for everything and know a little of
everything." "That I believe, Sancho," said Don Quixote; "go and good
luck to thee, and God speed thee." Sancho went off at top speed,
forcing Dapple out of his regular pace, and came to where the fair
huntress was standing, and dismounting knelt before her and said,
"Fair lady, that knight that you see there, the Knight of the Lions by
name, is my master, and I am a squire of his, and at home they call me
Sancho Panza. This same Knight of the Lions, who was called not long
since the Knight of the Rueful Countenance, sends by me to say may it
please your highness to give him leave that, with your permission,
approbation, and consent, he may come and carry out his wishes, which
are, as he says and I believe, to serve your exalted loftiness and
beauty; and if you give it, your ladyship will do a thing which will
redound to your honour, and he will receive a most distinguished
favour and happiness." "You have indeed, squire," said the lady,
"delivered your message with all the formalities such messages
require; rise up, for it is not right that the squire of a knight so
great as he of the Rueful Countenance, of whom we have heard a great
deal here, should remain on his knees; rise, my friend, and bid your
master welcome to the services of myself and the duke my husband, in a
country house we have here." Sancho got up, charmed as much by the
beauty of the good lady as by her high-bred air and her courtesy, but,
above all, by what she had said about having heard of his master, the
Knight of the Rueful Countenance; for if she did not call him Knight
of the Lions it was no doubt because he had so lately taken the name.
"Tell me, brother squire," asked the duchess (whose title, however, is
not known), "this master of yours, is he not one of whom there is a
history extant in print, called 'The Ingenious Gentleman, Don Quixote
of La Mancha,' who has for the lady of his heart a certain Dulcinea
del Toboso?" "He is the same, senora," replied Sancho; "and that
squire of his who figures, or ought to figure, in the said history
under the name of Sancho Panza, is myself, unless they have changed me
in the cradle, I mean in the press." "I am rejoiced at all this," said
the duchess; "go, brother Panza, and tell your master that he is
welcome to my estate, and that nothing could happen me that could give
me greater pleasure." Sancho returned to his master mightily pleased
with this gratifying answer, and told him all the great lady had said
to him, lauding to the skies, in his rustic phrase, her rare beauty,
her graceful gaiety, and her courtesy. Don Quixote drew himself up
briskly in his saddle, fixed himself in his stirrups, settled his
visor, gave Rocinante the spur, and with an easy bearing advanced to
kiss the hands of the duchess, who, having sent to summon the duke her
husband, told him while Don Quixote was approaching all about the
message; and as both of them had read the First Part of this history,
and from it were aware of Don Quixote's crazy turn, they awaited him
with the greatest delight and anxiety to make his acquaintance,
meaning to fall in with his humour and agree with everything he said,
and, so long as he stayed with them, to treat him as a knight-errant,
with all the ceremonies usual in the books of chivalry they had read,
for they themselves were very fond of them. Don Quixote now came up
with his visor raised, and as he seemed about to dismount Sancho made
haste to go and hold his stirrup for him; but in getting down off
Dapple he was so unlucky as to hitch his foot in one of the ropes of
the pack-saddle in such a way that he left me mounted on it, and took
away Dapple from under me without my feeling it." "That is an easy
matter," said Don Quixote, "and it is no new occurrence, for the same
thing happened to Sacripante at the siege of Albracca; the famous
thief, Brunello, by the same contrivance, took his horse from between
his legs." "Day came," continued Sancho, "and the moment I stirred the
stakes gave way and I fell to the ground with a mighty come down; I
looked about for the ass, but could not see him; the tears rushed to
my eyes and I raised such a lamentation that, if the author of our
history has not put it in, he may depend upon it he has left out a
good thing. Some days after, I know not how many, travelling with her
ladyship the Princess Micomicona, I saw my ass, and mounted upon him,
in the dress of a gipsy, was that Gines de Pasamonte, the great rogue
and rascal that my master and I freed from the chain." "That is not
where the mistake is," replied Samson; "it is, that before the ass has
turned up, the author speaks of Sancho as being mounted on it." "I
don't know what to say to that," said Sancho, "unless that the
historian made a mistake, or perhaps it might be a blunder of the
printer's." "No doubt that's it," said Samson; "but what became of the
hundred crowns? Did they vanish?" To which Sancho answered, "I spent
them for my own good, and my wife's, and my children's, and it is they
that have made my wife bear so patiently all my wanderings on highways
and byways, in the service of my master, Don Quixote; for if after all
this time I had come back to the house without a rap and without the
ass, it would have been a poor look-out for me; and if anyone wants to
know anything more about me, here I am, ready to answer the king
himself in person; and it is no affair of anyone's whether I took or
did not take, whether I spent or did not spend; for the whacks that
were given me in these journeys were to be paid for in money, even if
they were valued at no more than four maravedis apiece, another
hundred crowns would not pay me for half of them. Let each look to
himself and not try to make out white black, and black white; for each
of us is as God made him, aye, and often worse." "I will take care,"
said Carrasco, "to impress upon the author of the history that, if he
prints it again, he must not forget what worthy Sancho has said, for
it will raise it a good span higher." "Is there anything else to
correct in the history, senor bachelor?" asked Don Quixote. "No doubt
there is," replied he; "but not anything that will be of the same
importance as those I have mentioned." "Does the author promise a
second part at all?" said Don Quixote. "He does promise one," replied
Samson; "but he says he has not found it, nor does he know who has got
it; and we cannot say whether it will appear or not; and so, on that
head, as some say that no second part has ever been good, and others
that enough has been already written about Don Quixote, it is thought
there will be no second part; though some, who are jovial rather than
saturnine, say, 'Let us have more Quixotades, let Don Quixote charge
and Sancho chatter, and no matter what it may turn out, we shall be
satisfied with that.'" "And what does the author mean to do?" said Don
Quixote. "What?" replied Samson; "why, as soon as he has found the
history which he is now searching for with extraordinary diligence, he
will at once give it to the press, moved more by the profit that may
accrue to him from doing so than by any thought of praise." Whereat
Sancho observed, "The author looks for money and profit, does he? It
will be a wonder if he succeeds, for it will be only hurry, hurry,
with him, like the tailor on Easter Eve; and works done in a hurry are
never finished as perfectly as they ought to be. Let master Moor, or
whatever he is, pay attention to what he is doing, and I and my master
will give him as much grouting ready to his hand, in the way of
adventures and accidents of all sorts, as would make up not only one
second part, but a hundred. The good man fancies, no doubt, that we
are fast asleep in the straw here, but let him hold up our feet to be
shod and he will see which foot it is we go lame on. All I say is,
that if my master would take my advice, we would be now afield,
redressing outrages and righting wrongs, as is the use and custom of
good knights-errant." Sancho had hardly uttered these words when two
gentlemen, for such they seemed to be, entered the room, and one of
them, throwing his arms round Don Quixote's neck, said to him, "Your
appearance cannot leave any question as to your name, nor can your
name fail to identify your appearance; unquestionably, senor, you are
the real Don Quixote of La Mancha, the famous, the valiant, the wise,
the lover, the righter of wrongs, the guardian of minors and orphans,
the protector of widows, the killer of damsels, he who has for his
sole mistress the peerless Dulcinea del Toboso, is this gentleman
before you, my master; all other Don Quixotes and all other Sancho
Panzas are dreams and mockeries." "By God I believe it," said Don
Alvaro; "for you have uttered more drolleries, my friend, in the few
words you have spoken than the other Sancho Panza in all I ever heard
from him, and they were not a few. He was more greedy than
well-spoken, and more dull than droll; and I am convinced that the
enchanters who persecute Don Quixote the Good have been trying to
persecute me with Don Quixote the Bad. But I don't know what to say,
for I am ready to swear I left him shut up in the Casa del Nuncio at
Toledo, and here another Don Quixote turns up, though a very different
one from mine." "I don't know whether I am good," said Don Quixote,
"but I can safely say I am not 'the Bad;' and to prove it, let me tell
you, Senor Don Alvaro Tarfe, I have never in my life been in
Saragossa; so far from that, when it was told me that this imaginary
Don Quixote had been present at the jousts in that city, I declined to
enter it, in order to drag his falsehood before the face of the world;
and so I went on straight to Barcelona, the treasure-house of
courtesy, haven of strangers, asylum of the poor, home of the valiant,
champion of the wronged, pleasant exchange of firm friendships, and
city unrivalled in site and beauty. And though the adventures that
befell me there are not by any means matters of enjoyment, but rather
of regret, I do not regret them, simply because I have seen it. In a
word, Senor Don Alvaro Tarfe, I am Don Quixote of La Mancha, whose
calling it is to give aid to the needy of all sorts; and that being
so, it is not necessary for you, senora, to make any appeal to
benevolence, or deal in preambles, only to tell your woes plainly and
straightforwardly: for you have hearers that will know how, if not to
remedy them, to sympathise with them." On hearing this, the Distressed
Duenna made as though she would throw herself at Don Quixote's feet,
and actually did fall before them and said, as she strove to embrace
them, "Before these feet and legs I cast myself, O unconquered knight,
as before, what they are, the foundations and pillars of
knight-errantry; these feet I desire to kiss, for upon their steps
hangs and depends the sole remedy for my misfortune, O valorous
errant, whose veritable achievements leave behind and eclipse the
fabulous ones of the Amadises, Esplandians, and Belianises!" Then
turning from Don Quixote to Sancho Panza, and grasping his hands, she
said, "O thou, most loyal squire that ever served knight-errant in
this present age or ages past, whose goodness is more extensive than
the beard of Trifaldin my companion here of present, well mayest thou
boast thyself that, in serving the great Don Quixote, thou art
serving, summed up in one, the whole host of knights that have ever
borne arms in the world. I conjure thee, by what thou owest to thy
most loyal goodness, that thou wilt become my kind intercessor with
thy master, that he speedily give aid to this most humble and most
unfortunate countess." To this Sancho made answer, "As to my goodness,
senora, being as long and as great as your squire's beard, it matters
very little to me; may I have my soul well bearded and moustached when
it comes to quit this life, that's the point; about beards here below
I care little or nothing; but without all these blandishments and
prayers, I will beg my master (for I know he loves me, and, besides,
he has need of me just now for a certain business) to help and aid
your worship as far as he can; unpack your woes and lay them before
us, and leave us to deal with them, for we'll be all of one mind." The
duke and duchess, as it was they who had made the experiment of this
adventure, were ready to burst with laughter at all this, and between
themselves they commended the clever acting of the Trifaldi, who,
returning to her seat, said, "Queen Dona Maguncia reigned over the
famous kingdom of Kandy, which lies between the great Trapobana and
the Southern Sea, two leagues beyond Cape Comorin. She was the widow
of King Archipiela, her lord and husband, and of their marriage they
had issue the Princess Antonomasia, heiress of the kingdom; which
Princess Antonomasia was reared and brought up under my care and
direction, I being the oldest and highest in rank of her mother's
duennas. Time passed, and the young Antonomasia reached the age of
fourteen, and such a perfection of beauty, that nature could not raise
it higher. Then, it must not be supposed her intelligence was
childish; she was as intelligent as she was fair, and she was fairer
than all the world; and is so still, unless the envious fates and
hard-hearted sisters three have cut for her the thread of life. But
that they have not, for Heaven will not suffer so great a wrong to
Earth, as it would be to pluck unripe the grapes of the fairest
vineyard on its surface. Of this beauty, to which my poor feeble
tongue has failed to do justice, countless princes, not only of that
country, but of others, were enamoured, and among them a private
gentleman, who was at the court, dared to raise his thoughts to the
heaven of so great beauty, trusting to his youth, his gallant bearing,
his numerous accomplishments and graces, and his quickness and
readiness of wit; for I may tell your highnesses, if I am not wearying
you, that he played the guitar so as to make it speak, and, above all,
handles a sword as well as the best." "For that excellence alone,"
said Don Quixote at this, "the youth deserves to marry, not merely the
fair Quiteria, but Queen Guinevere herself, were she alive now, in
spite of Launcelot and all who would try to prevent it." "Say that to
my wife," said Sancho, who had until now listened in silence, "for she
won't hear of anything but each one marrying his equal, holding with
the proverb 'each ewe to her like.' What I would like is that this
good Basilio (for I am beginning to take a fancy to him already)
should marry this lady Quiteria; and a blessing and good luck--I meant
to say the opposite--on people who would prevent those who love one
another from marrying." "If all those who love one another were to
marry," said Don Quixote, "it would deprive parents of the right to
choose, and marry their children to the proper person and at the
proper time; and if it was left to daughters to choose husbands as
they pleased, one would be for choosing her father's servant, and
another, some one she has seen passing in the street and fancies
gallant and dashing, though he may be a drunken bully; for love and
fancy easily blind the eyes of the judgment, so much wanted in
choosing one's way of life; and the matrimonial choice is very liable
to error, and it needs great caution and the special favour of heaven
to make it a good one. He who has to make a long journey, will, if he
is wise, look out for some trusty and pleasant companion to accompany
him before he sets out. Why, then, should not he do the same who has
to make the whole journey of life down to the final halting-place of
death, more especially when the companion has to be his companion in
bed, at board, and everywhere, as the wife is to her husband? The
companionship of one's wife is no article of merchandise, that, after
it has been bought, may be returned, or bartered, or changed; for it
is an inseparable accident that lasts as long as life lasts; it is a
noose that, once you put it round your neck, turns into a Gordian
knot, which, if the scythe of Death does not cut it, there is no
untying. I could say a great deal more on this subject, were I not
prevented by the anxiety I feel to know if the senor licentiate has
anything more to tell about the story of Basilio." To this the
student, bachelor, or, as Don Quixote called him, licentiate, replied,
"I have nothing whatever to say further, but that from the moment
Basilio learned that the fair Quiteria was to be married to Camacho
the rich, he has never been seen to smile, or heard to utter rational
word, and he always goes about moody and dejected, talking to himself
in a way that would have been unintelligible near at hand, much more
at a distance. His garb was what has been described, save that as he
drew near, Don Quixote perceived that a tattered doublet which he wore
was amber-tanned, from which he concluded that one who wore such
garments could not be of very low rank. Approaching them, the youth
greeted them in a harsh and hoarse voice but with great courtesy. Don
Quixote returned his salutation with equal politeness, and dismounting
from Rocinante advanced with well-bred bearing and grace to embrace
him, and held him for some time close in his arms as if he had known
him for a long time. The other, whom we may call the Ragged One of the
Sorry Countenance, as Don Quixote was of the Rueful, after submitting
to the embrace pushed him back a little and, placing his hands on Don
Quixote's shoulders, stood gazing at him as if seeking to see whether
he knew him, not less amazed, perhaps, at the sight of the face,
figure, and armour of Don Quixote than Don Quixote was at the sight of
him. To be brief, the first to speak after embracing was the Ragged
One, and he said what will be told farther on. CHAPTER XXIV. IN WHICH
IS CONTINUED THE ADVENTURE OF THE KNIGHT OF THE GROVE CHAPTER XV
WHEREIN IT IS TOLD AND KNOWN WHO THE KNIGHT OF THE MIRRORS AND HIS
SQUIRE WERE CHAPTER XVI OF WHAT BEFELL DON QUIXOTE WITH A DISCREET
GENTLEMAN OF LA MANCHA Don Quixote pursued his journey in the high
spirits, satisfaction, and self-complacency already described,
fancying himself the most valorous knight-errant of the age in the
world because of his late victory. All the adventures that could
befall him from that time forth he regarded as already done and
brought to a happy issue; he made light of enchantments and
enchanters; he thought no more of the countless drubbings that had
been administered to him in the course of his knight-errantry, nor of
the volley of stones that had levelled half his teeth, nor of the
ingratitude of the galley slaves, nor of the audacity of the
Yanguesans and the shower of stakes that fell upon him; in short, he
said to himself that could he discover any means, mode, or way of
disenchanting his lady Dulcinea, he would not envy the highest fortune
that the most fortunate knight-errant of yore ever reached or could
reach. He was going along entirely absorbed in these fancies, when
Sancho said to him, "Isn't it odd, senor, that I have still before my
eyes that monstrous enormous nose of my gossip, Tom Cecial?" "And dost
thou, then, believe, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "that the Knight of
the Mirrors was the bachelor Carrasco, and his squire Tom Cecial thy
gossip?" "I don't know what to say to that," said Sancho, "unless that
the historian made a mistake, or perhaps it might be a blunder of the
printer's." "No doubt that's it," said Samson; "but what became of the
hundred crowns? Did they vanish?" To which Sancho answered, "I spent
them for my own good, and my wife's, and my children's, and it is they
that have made my wife bear so patiently all my wanderings on highways
and byways, in the service of my master, Don Quixote; for if after all
this time I had come back to the house without a rap and without the
ass, it would have been a poor look-out for me; and if anyone wants to
know anything more about me, here I am, ready to answer the king
himself in person; and it is no affair of anyone's whether I took or
did not take, whether I spent or did not spend; for the whacks that
were given me in these journeys were to be paid for in money, even if
they were valued at no more than four maravedis apiece, another
hundred crowns would not pay me for half of them. Let each look to
himself and not try to make out white black, and black white; for each
of us is as God made him, aye, and often worse." "I will take care,"
said Carrasco, "to impress upon the author of the history that, if he
prints it again, he must not forget what worthy Sancho has said, for
it will raise it a good span higher." "Is there anything else to
correct in the history, senor bachelor?" asked Don Quixote. "No doubt
there is," replied he; "but not anything that will be of the same
importance as those I have mentioned." "Does the author promise a
second part at all?" said Don Quixote. "He does promise one," replied
Samson; "but he says he has not found it, nor does he know who has got
it; and we cannot say whether it will appear or not; and so, on that
head, as some say that no second part has ever been good, and others
that enough has been already written about Don Quixote, it is thought
there will be no second part; though some, who are jovial rather than
saturnine, say, 'Let us have more Quixotades, let Don Quixote charge
and Sancho chatter, and no matter what it may turn out, we shall be
satisfied with that.'" "And what does the author mean to do?" said Don
Quixote. "What?" replied Samson; "why, as soon as he has found the
history which he is now searching for with extraordinary diligence, he
will at once give it to the press, moved more by the profit that may
accrue to him from doing so than by any thought of praise." Whereat
Sancho observed, "The author looks for money and profit, does he? It
will be a wonder if he succeeds, for it will be only hurry, hurry,
with him, like the tailor on Easter Eve; and works done in a hurry are
never finished as perfectly as they ought to be. Let master Moor, or
whatever he is, pay attention to what he is doing, and I and my master
will give him as much grouting ready to his hand, in the way of
adventures and accidents of all sorts, as would make up not only one
second part, but a hundred. The good man fancies, no doubt, that we
are fast asleep in the straw here, but let him hold up our feet to be
shod and he will see which foot it is we go lame on. All I say is,
that if my master would take my advice, we would be now afield,
redressing outrages and righting wrongs, as is the use and custom of
good knights-errant." Sancho had hardly uttered these words when two
gentlemen, for such they seemed to be, entered the room, and one of
them, throwing his arms round Don Quixote's neck, said to him, "Your
appearance cannot leave any question as to your name, nor can your
name fail to identify your appearance; unquestionably, senor, you are
the real Don Quixote of La Mancha, cynosure and morning star of
knight-errantry, despite and in defiance of him who has sought to
usurp your name and bring to naught your achievements, as the author
of this book which I here present to you has done;" and with this he
put a book which his companion carried into the hands of Don Quixote,
who took it, and without replying began to run his eye over it; but he
presently returned it saying, "In the little I have seen I have
discovered three things in this author that deserve to be censured.
The first is some words that I have read in the preface; the next that
the language is Aragonese, for sometimes he writes without articles;
and the third, which above all stamps him as ignorant, is that he goes
wrong and departs from the truth in the most important part of the
history, for here he says that my squire Sancho Panza's wife is called
Mari Gutierrez, when she is called nothing of the sort, but Teresa
Panza; and when a man errs on such an important point as this there is
good reason to fear that he is in error on every other point in the
history." "A nice sort of historian, indeed!" exclaimed Sancho at
this; "he must know a deal about our affairs when he calls my wife
Teresa Panza, Mari Gutierrez; take the book again, senor, and see if I
am in it and if he has changed my name." "From your talk, friend,"
said Don Jeronimo, "no doubt you are Sancho Panza, Senor Don Quixote's
squire." "Yes, I am," said Sancho; "and I'm proud of it." "Faith,
then," said the gentleman, "this new author does not handle you with
the decency that displays itself in your person; he makes you out a
heavy feeder and a fool, and not in the least droll, and a very
different being from the Sancho described in the First Part of your
master's history." "God forgive him," said Sancho; "he might have left
me in my corner without troubling his head about me; 'let him who
knows how ring the bells; 'Saint Peter is very well in Rome.'" The two
gentlemen pressed Don Quixote to come into their room and have supper
with them, as they knew very well there was nothing in that inn fit
for one of his sort. Don Quixote, who was always polite, yielded to
their request and supped with them. Sancho stayed behind with the
stew. and invested with plenary delegated authority seated himself at
the head of the table, for there was only that seat placed, and no
more than one cover laid. A personage, who it appeared afterwards was
a physician, placed himself standing by his side with a whalebone wand
in his hand. They then lifted up a fine white cloth covering fruit and
a great variety of dishes of different sorts; one who looked like a
student said grace, and a page put a laced bib on Sancho, while
another who played the part of head carver placed a dish of fruit
before him. But hardly had he tasted a morsel when the man with the
wand touched the plate with it, and they took it away from before him
with the utmost celerity. The carver, however, brought him another
dish, and Sancho proceeded to try it; but before he could get at it,
not to say taste it, already the wand had touched it and a page had
carried it off with the same promptitude as the fruit. Sancho seeing
this was puzzled, and looking from one to another asked if this dinner
was to be eaten after the fashion of a jugglery trick. To this he with
the wand replied, "It is not to be eaten, senor governor, except as is
usual and customary in other islands where there are governors. I,
senor, am a physician, and I am paid a salary in this island to serve
its governors as such, and I have a much greater regard for their
health than for my own, studying day and night and making myself
acquainted with the governor's constitution, in order to be able to
cure him when he falls sick. The chief thing I have to do is to attend
at his dinners and suppers and allow him to eat what appears to me to
be fit for him, and keep from him what I think will do him harm and be
injurious to his stomach; and therefore I ordered that plate of fruit
to be removed as being too moist, and that other dish I ordered to be
removed as being too hot and containing many spices that stimulate
thirst; for he who drinks much kills and consumes the radical moisture
wherein life consists." "Well then," said Sancho, "that dish of roast
partridges there that seems so savoury will not do me any harm." To
this the physician replied, "Of those my lord the governor shall not
eat so long as I live." "Why so?" said Sancho. "Because," replied the
doctor, "our master Hippocrates, the polestar and beacon of medicine,
says in one of his aphorisms omnis saturatio mala, perdicis autem
pessima, which means 'all repletion is bad, but that of partridge is
the worst of all." "In that case," said Sancho, "let senor doctor see
among the dishes that are on the table what will do me most good and
least harm, and let me eat it, without tapping it with his stick; for
by the life of the governor, and so may God suffer me to enjoy it, but
I'm dying of hunger; and in spite of the doctor and all he may say, to
deny me food is the way to take my life instead of prolonging it."
"Your worship is right, senor governor," said the physician; "and
therefore your worship, I consider, should not eat of those stewed
rabbits there, because it is a furry kind of food; if that veal were
not roasted and served with pickles, you might try it; but it is out
of the question." "That big dish that is smoking farther off," said
Sancho, "seems to me to be an olla podrida, and out of the diversity
of things in such ollas, I can't fail to light upon something tasty
and good for me." "Absit," said the doctor; "far from us be any such
base thought! There is nothing in the world less nourishing than an
olla podrida; to canons, or rectors of colleges, or peasants' weddings
with your ollas podridas, but let us have none of them on the tables
of governors, where everything that is present should be delicate and
refined; and the reason is, that always, everywhere and by everybody,
simple medicines are more esteemed than compound ones, for we cannot
go wrong in those that are simple, while in the compound we may, by
merely altering the quantity of the things composing them. But what I
am of opinion the governor should cat now in order to preserve and
fortify his health is a hundred or so of wafer cakes and a few thin
slices of conserve of quinces, which will settle his stomach and help
his digestion." Sancho on hearing this threw himself back in his chair
and surveyed the doctor steadily, and in a solemn tone asked him what
his name was and where he had studied. He replied, "My name, senor
governor, is Doctor Pedro Recio de Aguero I am a native of a place
called Tirteafuera which lies between Caracuel and Almodovar del
Campo, on the right-hand side, and I have the degree of doctor from
the university of Osuna." To which Sancho, glowing all over with rage,
returned, "Then let Doctor Pedro Recio de Malaguero, native of
Tirteafuera, a place that's on the right-hand side as we go from
Caracuel to Almodovar del Campo, graduate of Osuna, get out of my
presence at once; or I swear by the sun I'll take a cudgel, and by
dint of blows, beginning with him, I'll not leave a doctor in the
whole island; at least of those I know to be ignorant; for as to
learned, wise, sensible physicians, them I will reverence and honour
as divine persons. Once more I say let Pedro Recio get out of this or
I'll take this chair I am sitting on and break it over his head. And
if they call me to account for it, I'll clear myself by saying I
served God in killing a bad doctor--a general executioner. And now
give me something to eat, or else take your government; for a trade
that does not feed its master is not worth two beans." The doctor was
dismayed when he saw the governor in such a passion, and he would have
made a Tirteafuera out of the room but that the same instant a
post-horn sounded in the street; and the carver putting his head out
of the window turned round and said, "It's a courier from my lord the
duke, no doubt with some despatch of importance." The courier came in
all sweating and flurried, and taking a paper from his bosom, placed
it in the governor's hands. Sancho handed it to the majordomo and bade
him read the superscription, which ran thus: To Don Sancho Panza,
Governor of the Island of Barataria, into his own hands or those of
his secretary. Sancho when he heard this said, "Which of you is my
secretary?" "I am, senor," said one of those present, "for I can read
and write, and am a Biscayan." "With that addition," said Sancho, "you
might be secretary to the emperor himself; open this paper and see
what it says." The new-born secretary obeyed, and having read the
contents said the matter was one to be discussed in private. Sancho
ordered the chamber to be cleared, the majordomo and the carver only
remaining; so the doctor and the others withdrew, and then the
secretary read the letter, which was as follows: It has come to my
knowledge, Senor Don Sancho Panza, that certain enemies of mine and of
the island are about to make a furious attack upon it some night, I
know not when. It behoves you to be on the alert and keep watch, that
they surprise you not. I also know by trustworthy spies that four
persons have entered the town in disguise in order to take your life,
because they stand in dread of your great capacity; keep your eyes
open and take heed who approaches you to address you, and eat nothing
that is presented to you. I will take care to send you aid if you find
yourself in difficulty, but in all things you will act as may be
expected of your judgment. From this place, the Sixteenth of August,
at four in the morning. Your friend, THE DUKE Sancho was astonished,
and those who stood by made believe to be so too, and turning to the
majordomo he said to him, "What we have got to do first, and it must
be done at once, is to put Doctor Recio in the lock-up; for if anyone
wants to kill me it is he, and by a slow death and the worst of all,
which is hunger." "Likewise," said the carver, "it is my opinion your
worship should not eat anything that is on this table, for the whole
was a present from some nuns; and as they say, 'behind the cross
there's the devil; to the fire with it." Taking down another book, the
barber said, "This is 'The Mirror of Chivalry.'" "I know his worship,"
said the curate; "that is where Senor Reinaldos of Montalvan figures
with his friends and comrades, greater thieves than Cacus, and the
Twelve Peers of France with the veracious historian Turpin; however, I
am not for condemning them to more than perpetual banishment, because,
at any rate, they have some share in the invention of the famous
Matteo Boiardo, whence too the Christian poet Ludovico Ariosto wove
his web, to whom, if I find him here, and speaking any language but
his own, I shall show no respect whatever; but if he speaks his own
tongue I will put him upon my head." "Well, I have him in Italian,"
said the barber, "but I do not understand him." "Nor would it be well
that you should understand him," said the curate, "and on that score
we might have excused the Captain if he had not brought him into Spain
and turned him into Castilian. He robbed him of a great deal of his
natural force, and so do all those who try to turn books written in
verse into another language, for, with all the pains they take and all
the cleverness they show, they never can reach the level of the
originals as they were first produced. In short, I say that this book,
and all that may be found treating of those French affairs, should be
thrown into or deposited in some dry well, until after more
consideration it is settled what is to be done with them; excepting
always one 'Bernardo del Carpio' that is going about, and another
called 'Roncesvalles;' for these, if they come into my hands, shall
pass at once into those of the housekeeper, and from hers into the
fire without any reprieve." To all this the barber gave his assent,
and looked upon it as right and proper, being persuaded that the
curate was so staunch to the Faith and loyal to the Truth that he
would not for the world say anything opposed to them. Opening another
book he saw it was "Palmerin de Oliva," and beside it was another
called "Palmerin of England," seeing which the licentiate said, "Let
the Olive be made firewood of at once and burned until no ashes even
are left; and let that Palm of England be kept and preserved as a
thing that stands alone, and let such another case be made for it as
that which Alexander found among the spoils of Darius and set aside
for the safe keeping of the works of the poet Homer. This book,
gossip, is of authority for two reasons, first because it is very
good, and secondly because it is said to have been written by a wise
and witty king of Portugal. All the adventures at the Castle of
Miraguarda are excellent and of admirable contrivance, and the
language is polished and clear, studying and observing the style
befitting the speaker with propriety and judgment. So then, provided
it seems good to you, Master Nicholas, I say let this and 'Amadis of
Gaul' be remitted the penalty of fire, and as for all the rest, let
them perish without further question or query." "Nay, gossip," said
the barber, "for this that I have here is the famous 'Don Belianis.'"
"Well," said the curate, "that and the second, third, and fourth parts
all stand in need of a little rhubarb to purge their excess of bile,
and they must be cleared of all that stuff about the Castle of Fame
and other greater affectations, to which end let them be allowed the
over-seas term, and, according as they mend, so shall mercy or justice
be meted out to them; and in the mean time, gossip, do you keep them
in your house and let no one read them." "With all my heart," said the
barber; and not caring to tire himself with reading more books of
chivalry, he told the housekeeper to take all the big ones and throw
them into the yard. It was not said to one dull or deaf, but to one
who enjoyed burning them more than weaving the broadest and finest web
that could be; and seizing about eight at a time, she flung them out
of the window. In carrying so many together she let one fall at the
feet of the barber, who took it up, curious to know whose it was, and
found it said, "History of the Famous Knight, Tirante el Blanco." "God
bless me!" said the curate with a shout, "'Tirante el Blanco' here!
Hand it over, gossip, for in it I reckon I have found a treasury of
enjoyment and a mine of recreation. Here is Don Kyrieleison of
Montalvan, a valiant knight, and his brother Thomas of Montalvan, and
the knight Fonseca, with the battle the bold Tirante fought with the
mastiff, and the witticisms of the damsel Placerdemivida, and the
loves and wiles of the widow Reposada, and the empress in love with
the squire Hipolito--in truth, gossip, by right of its style it is the
best book in the world. Here knights eat and sleep, and die in their
beds, and make their wills before dying, and a great deal more of
which there is nothing in all the other books. Nevertheless, I say he
who wrote it, for deliberately composing such fooleries, deserves to
be sent to the galleys for life. Take it home with you and read it,
and you will see that what I have said is true." "As you will," said
the barber; "but what are we to do with these little books that are
left?" "These must be, not chivalry, but poetry," said the curate; and
opening one he saw it was the "Diana" of Jorge de Montemayor, and,
supposing all the others to be of the same sort, "these," he said, "do
not deserve to be burned like the others, for they neither do nor can
do the mischief the books of chivalry have done, being books of
entertainment that can hurt no one." "Ah, senor!" said the niece,
"your worship had better order these to be burned as well as the
others; for it would be no wonder if, after being cured of his
chivalry disorder, my uncle, by reading these, took a fancy to turn
shepherd and range the woods and fields singing and piping; or, what
would be still worse, to turn poet, which they say is an incurable and
infectious malady." "The damsel is right," said the curate, "and it
will be well to put this stumbling-block and temptation out of our
friend's way. To begin, then, with the 'Diana' of Montemayor. I am of
opinion it should not be burned, but that it should be cleared of all
that about the sage Felicia and the magic water, and of almost all the
longer pieces of verse: let it keep, and welcome, its prose and the
honour of being the first of books of the kind." "This that comes
next," said the barber, "is the 'Diana,' entitled the 'Second Part, by
the Salamancan,' and this other has the same title, and its author is
Gil Polo." "As for that of the Salamancan," replied the curate, "let
it go to swell the number of the condemned in the yard, and let Gil
Polo's be preserved as if it came from Apollo himself: but get on,
gossip, and make haste, for it is growing late." "This book," said the
barber, opening another, "is the ten books of the 'Fortune of Love,'
written by Antonio de Lofraso, a Sardinian poet." "By the orders I
have received," said the curate, "since Apollo has been Apollo, and
the Muses have been Muses, and poets have been poets, so droll and
absurd a book as this has never been written, and in its way it is the
best and the most singular of all of this species that have as yet
appeared, and he who has not read it may be sure he has never read
what is delightful. Give it here, gossip, for I make more account of
having found it than if they had given me a cassock of Florence
stuff." He put it aside with extreme satisfaction, and the barber went
on, "These that come next are 'The Shepherd of Iberia,' 'Nymphs of
Henares,' and 'The Enlightenment of Jealousy.'" "Then all we have to
do," said the curate, "is to hand them over to the secular arm of the
housekeeper, and ask me not why, or we shall never have done." "This
next is the 'Pastor de Filida.'" "No Pastor that," said the curate,
"but a highly polished courtier; let it be preserved as a precious
jewel." "This large one here," said the barber, "is called 'The
Treasury of various Poems.'" "If there were not so many of them," said
the curate, "they would be more relished: this book must be weeded and
cleansed of certain vulgarities which it has with its excellences; let
it be preserved because the author is a friend of mine, and out of
respect for other more heroic and loftier works that he has written."
"This," continued the barber, "is the 'Cancionero' of Lopez de
Maldonado." "The author of that book, too," said the curate, "is a
great friend of mine, and his verses from his own mouth are the
admiration of all who hear them, for such is the sweetness of his
voice that he enchants when he chants them: it gives rather too much
of its eclogues, but what is good was never yet plentiful: let it be
kept with those that have been set apart. But what book is that next
it?" "The 'Galatea' of Miguel de Cervantes," said the barber. "That
Cervantes has been for many years a great friend of mine, and to my
knowledge he has had more experience in reverses than in verses. His
book has some good invention in it, it presents us with something but
brings nothing to a conclusion: we must wait for the Second Part it
promises: perhaps with amendment it may succeed in winning the full
measure of grace that is now denied it; and in the mean time do you,
senor gossip, keep it shut up in your own quarters." "Very good," said
the barber; "and here come three together, the 'Araucana' of Don
Alonso de Ercilla, the 'Austriada' of Juan Rufo, Justice of Cordova,
and the 'Montserrate' of Christobal de Virues, the Valencian poet."
"These three books," said the curate, "are the best that have been
written in Castilian in heroic verse, and they may compare with the
most famous of Italy; let them be preserved as the richest treasures
of poetry that Spain possesses." The curate was tired and would not
look into any more books, and so he decided that, "contents
uncertified," all the rest should be burned; but just then the barber
held open one, called "The Tears of Angelica." "I should have shed
tears myself," said the curate when he heard the title, "had I ordered
that book to be burned, for its author was one of the famous poets of
the world, not to say of Spain, and was very happy in the translation
of some of Ovid's fables." CHAPTER VII. OF THE SECOND SALLY OF OUR
WORTHY KNIGHT DON QUIXOTE OF LA MANCHA At this instant Don Quixote
began shouting out, "Here, here, valiant knights! here is need for you
to put forth the might of your strong arms, for they of the Court are
gaining the mastery in the tourney!" Called away by this noise and
outcry, they proceeded no farther with the scrutiny of the remaining
books, and so it is thought that "The Carolea," "The Lion of Spain,"
and "The Deeds of the Emperor," written by Don Luis de Avila, went to
the fire unseen and unheard; for no doubt they were among those that
remained, and perhaps if the curate had seen them they would not have
undergone so severe a sentence. When they reached Don Quixote he was
already out of bed, and was still shouting and raving, and slashing
and cutting all round, as wide awake as if he had never slept. They
closed with him and by force got him back to bed, and when he had
become a little calm, addressing the curate, he said to him, "Of a
truth, Senor Archbishop Turpin, it is a great disgrace for us who call
ourselves the Twelve Peers, so carelessly to allow the knights of the
Court to gain the victory in this tourney, we the adventurers having
carried off the honour on the three former days." "Hush, gossip," said
the curate; "please God, the luck may turn, and what is lost to-day
may be won to-morrow; for the present let your worship have a care of
your health, for it seems to me that you are over-fatigued, if not
badly wounded." "Wounded no," said Don Quixote, "but bruised and
battered no doubt, for that bastard Don Roland has cudgelled me with
the trunk of an oak tree, and all for envy, because he sees that I
alone rival him in his achievements. But I should not call myself
Reinaldos of Montalvan did he not pay me for it in spite of all his
enchantments as soon as I rise from this bed. For the present let them
bring me something to eat, for that, I feel, is what will be more to
my purpose, and leave it to me to avenge myself." They did as he
wished; they gave him something to eat, and once more he fell asleep,
leaving them marvelling at his madness. That night the housekeeper
burned to ashes all the books that were in the yard and in the whole
house; and some must have been consumed that deserved preservation in
everlasting archives, but their fate and the laziness of the examiner
did not permit it, and so in them was verified the proverb that the
innocent suffer for the guilty. One of the remedies which the curate
and the barber immediately applied to their friend's disorder was to
wall up and plaster the room where the books were, so that when he got
up he should not find them (possibly the cause being removed the
effect might cease), and they might say that a magician had carried
them off, room and all; and this was done with all despatch. Two days
later Don Quixote got up, and the first thing he did was to embrace me
closely, and then he said to me, 'For a long time now, O valiant
knight Don Quixote of La Mancha, we who are here enchanted in these
solitudes have been hoping to see thee, that thou mayest make known to
the world what is shut up and concealed in this deep cave, called the
cave of Montesinos, which thou hast entered, an achievement reserved
for thy invincible heart and stupendous courage alone to attempt. Come
with me, illustrious sir, and I will show thee the marvels hidden
within this transparent castle, whereof I am the alcaide and perpetual
warden; for I am Montesinos himself, from whom the cave takes its
name.' "The instant he told me he was Montesinos, I asked him if the
story they told in the world above here was true, that he had taken
out the heart of his great friend Durandarte from his breast with a
little dagger, and carried it to the lady Belerma, as his friend when
at the point of death had commanded him. He said in reply that they
spoke the truth in every respect except as to the dagger, for it was
not a dagger, nor little, but a burnished poniard sharper than an
awl." "That poniard must have been made by Ramon de Hoces the
Sevillian," said Sancho. "I do not know," said Don Quixote; "it could
not have been by that poniard maker, however, because Ramon de Hoces
was a man of yesterday, and the affair of Roncesvalles, where this
mishap occurred, was long ago; but the question is of no great
importance, nor does it affect or make any alteration in the truth or
substance of the story." "That is true," said the cousin; "continue,
Senor Don Quixote, for I am listening to you with the greatest
pleasure in the world." "And with no less do I tell the tale," said
Don Quixote; "and so, to proceed--the venerable Montesinos led me into
the palace of crystal, where, in a lower chamber, strangely cool and
entirely of alabaster, was an elaborately wrought marble tomb, upon
which I beheld, stretched at full length, a knight, not of bronze, or
marble, or jasper, as are seen on other tombs, but of actual flesh and
bone. His right hand (which seemed to me somewhat hairy and sinewy, a
sign of great strength in its owner) lay on the side of his heart; but
before I could put any question to Montesinos, he, seeing me gazing at
the tomb in amazement, said to me, 'This is my friend Durandarte,
flower and mirror of the true lovers and valiant knights of his time.
He is held enchanted here, as I myself and many others are, by that
French enchanter Merlin, who, they say, was the devil's son; but my
belief is, not that he was the devil's son, but that he knew, as the
saying is, a point more than the devil. How or why he enchanted us, no
one knows, but time will tell, and I suspect that time is not far off.
What I marvel at is, that I know it to be as sure as that it is now
day, that Durandarte ended his life in my arms, and that, after his
death, I took out his heart with my own hands; and indeed it must have
weighed more than two pounds, for, according to naturalists, he who
has a large heart is more largely endowed with valour than he who has
a small one. Then, as this is the case, and as the knight did really
die, how comes it that he now moans and sighs from time to time, as if
he were still alive?' "As he said this, the wretched Durandarte cried
out in a loud voice: O cousin Montesinos! 'T was my last request of
thee, When my soul hath left the body, And that lying dead I be, With
thy poniard or thy dagger Cut the heart from out my breast, And bear
it to Belerma. This was my last request." On hearing which, the
venerable Montesinos fell on his knees before the unhappy knight, and
with tearful eyes exclaimed, 'Long since, Senor Durandarte, my beloved
cousin, long since have I done what you bade me on that sad day when I
lost you; I took out your heart as well as I could, not leaving an
atom of it in your breast, I wiped it with a lace handkerchief, and I
took the road to France with it, having first laid you in the bosom of
the earth with tears enough to wash and cleanse my hands of the blood
that covered them after wandering among your bowels; and more by
token, O cousin of my soul, at the first village I came to after
leaving Roncesvalles, I sprinkled a little salt upon your heart to
keep it sweet, and bring it, if not fresh, at least pickled, into the
presence of the lady Belerma, whom, together with you, myself,
Guadiana your squire, the duenna Ruidera and her seven daughters and
two nieces, and many more of your friends and acquaintances, the sage
Merlin has been keeping enchanted here these many years; and although
more than five hundred have gone by, not one of us has died; Ruidera
and her daughters and nieces alone are missing, and these, because of
the tears they shed, Merlin, out of the compassion he seems to have
felt for them, changed into so many lakes, which to this day in the
world of the living, and in the province of La Mancha, are called the
Lakes of Ruidera. The seven daughters belong to the kings of Spain and
the two nieces to the knights of a very holy order called the Order of
St. John. Guadiana your squire, likewise bewailing your fate, was
changed into a river of his own name, but when he came to the surface
and beheld the sun of another heaven, so great was his grief at
finding he was leaving you, that he plunged into the bowels of the
earth; however, as he cannot help following his natural course, he
from time to time comes forth and shows himself to the sun and the
world. The lakes aforesaid send him their waters, and with these, and
others that come to him, he makes a grand and imposing entrance into
Portugal; but for all that, go where he may, he shows his melancholy
and sadness, and takes no pride in breeding dainty choice fish, only
coarse and tasteless sorts, very different from those of the golden
Tagus. All this that I tell you now, O cousin mine, I have told you
many times before, and as you make no answer, I fear that either you
believe me not, or do not hear me, whereat I feel God knows what
grief. I have now news to give you, which, if it serves not to
alleviate your sufferings, will not in any wise increase them. Know
that you have here before you (open your eyes and you will see) that
great knight of whom the sage Merlin has prophesied such great things;
that Don Quixote of La Mancha I mean, who has again, and to better
purpose than in past times, revived in these days knight-errantry,
long since forgotten, and by whose intervention and aid it may be we
shall be disenchanted; for great deeds are reserved for great men.'
"'And if that may not be,' said the wretched Durandarte in a low and
feeble voice, 'if that may not be, then, my cousin, I say "patience
and shuffle;"' and turning over on his side, he relapsed into his
former silence without uttering another word. "And now there was heard
a great outcry and lamentation, accompanied by deep sighs and bitter
sobs. I looked round, and through the crystal wall I saw passing
through another chamber a procession of two lines of fair damsels all
clad in mourning, and with white turbans of Turkish fashion on their
heads. Behind, in the rear of these, there came a lady, for so from
her dignity she seemed to be, also clad in black, with a white veil so
long and ample that it swept the ground. Her turban was twice as large
as the largest of any of the others; her eyebrows met, her nose was
rather flat, her mouth was large but with ruddy lips, and her teeth,
of which at times she allowed a glimpse, were seen to be sparse and
ill-set, though as white as peeled almonds. She carried in her hands a
fine cloth, and in it, as well as I could make out, a heart that had
been mummied, so parched and dried was it. Montesinos told me that all
those forming the procession were the attendants of Durandarte and
Belerma, who were enchanted there with their master and mistress, and
that the last, she who carried the heart in the cloth, was the lady
Belerma, who, with her damsels, four days in the week went in
procession singing, or rather weeping, dirges over the body and
miserable heart of his cousin; and that if she appeared to me somewhat
ill-favoured or not so beautiful as fame reported her, it was because
of the bad nights and worse days that she passed in that enchantment,
as I could see by the great dark circles round her eyes, and her
sickly complexion; 'her sallowness, and the rings round her eyes,'
said he, 'are not caused by the periodical ailment usual with women,
for it is many months and even years since she has had any, but by the
grief her own heart suffers because of that which she holds in her
hand perpetually, and which recalls and brings back to her memory the
sad fate of her lost lover; were it not for this, hardly would the
great Dulcinea del Toboso, so celebrated in all these parts, and even
in the world, come up to her for beauty, grace, and gaiety.' "'Hold
hard!' said I at this, 'tell your story as you ought, Senor Don
Montesinos, for you know very well that all comparisons are odious,
and there is no occasion to compare one person with another; the
peerless Dulcinea del Toboso is what she is, and the lady Dona Belerma
is what she is and has been, and that's enough.' To which he made
answer, 'Forgive me, Senor Don Quixote; I own I was wrong and spoke
unadvisedly in saying that the lady Dulcinea could scarcely come up to
the lady Belerma; for it were enough for me to have learned, by what
means I know not, that you are her knight, to make me bite my tongue
out before I compared her to anything save heaven itself.' After this
apology which the great Montesinos made me, my heart recovered itself
from the shock I had received in hearing my lady compared with
Belerma." "Still I wonder," said Sancho, "that your worship did not
get upon the old fellow and bruise every bone of him with kicks, and
pluck his beard until you didn't leave a hair in it." "Nay, Sancho, my
friend," said Don Quixote, "it would not have been right in me to do
that, for we are all bound to pay respect to the aged, even though
they be not knights, but especially to those who are, and who are
enchanted; I only know I gave him as good as he brought in the many
other questions and answers we exchanged." "I cannot understand, Senor
Don Quixote," remarked the cousin here, "how it is that your worship,
in such a short space of time as you have been below there, could have
seen so many things, and said and answered so much." "How long is it
since I went down?" asked Don Quixote. "Little better than an hour,"
replied Sancho. "That cannot be," returned Don Quixote, "because night
overtook me while I was there, and day came, and it was night again
and day again three times; so that, by my reckoning, I have been three
days in those remote regions beyond our ken." "My master must be
right," replied Sancho; "for as everything that has happened to him is
by enchantment, maybe what seems to us an hour would seem three days
and nights there." "That's it," said Don Quixote. "And did your
worship eat anything all that time, senor?" asked the cousin. "I never
touched a morsel," answered Don Quixote, "nor did I feel hunger, or
think of it." "And do the enchanted eat?" said the cousin. "They
neither eat," said Don Quixote; "nor are they subject to the greater
excrements, though it is thought that their nails, beards, and hair
grow." "And do the enchanted sleep, now, senor?" asked Sancho.
"Certainly not," replied Don Quixote; "at least, during those three
days I was with them not one of them closed an eye, nor did I either."
"The proverb, 'Tell me what company thou keepest and I'll tell thee
what thou art,' or in that other, 'Not with whom thou art bred, but
with whom thou art fed,' and of those, 'Who leans against a good tree,
a good shade covers him;' I have leant upon a good master, and I have
been for months going about with him, and please God I shall be just
such another; long life to him and long life to me, for neither will
he be in any want of empires to rule, or I of islands to govern." "No,
Sancho my friend, certainly not," said the duke, "for in the name of
Senor Don Quixote I confer upon you the government of one of no small
importance that I have at my disposal." "Go down on thy knees,
Sancho," said Don Quixote, "and kiss the feet of his excellence for
the favour he has bestowed upon thee." Sancho obeyed, and on seeing
this the ecclesiastic stood up from table completely out of temper,
exclaiming, "By the gown I wear, I am almost inclined to say that your
excellence is as great a fool as these sinners. No wonder they are
mad, when people who are in their senses sanction their madness! I
leave your excellence with them, for so long as they are in the house,
I will remain in my own, and spare myself the trouble of reproving
what I cannot remedy;" and without uttering another word, or eating
another morsel, he went off, the entreaties of the duke and duchess
being entirely unavailing to stop him; not that the duke said much to
him, for he could not, because of the laughter his uncalled-for anger
provoked. When he had done laughing, he said to Don Quixote, "You have
replied on your own behalf so stoutly, Sir Knight of the Lions, that
there is no occasion to seek further satisfaction for this, which,
though it may look like an offence, is not so at all, for, as women
can give no offence, no more can ecclesiastics, as you very well
know." "That is true," said Don Quixote, "and what you had best do
with him is to leave him to take his chance whether he be lost or not,
for the horses we shall have when we come out victors will be so many
that even Rocinante will run a risk of being changed for another. But
attend to me and observe, for I wish to give thee some account of the
chief knights who accompany these two armies; and that thou mayest the
better see and mark, let us withdraw to that hillock which rises
yonder, whence both armies may be seen." They did so, and placed
themselves on a rising ground from which the two droves that Don
Quixote made armies of might have been plainly seen if the clouds of
dust they raised had not obscured them and blinded the sight;
nevertheless, seeing in his imagination what he did not see and what
did not exist, he began thus in a loud voice: "That knight whom thou
seest yonder in yellow armour, who bears upon his shield a lion
crowned crouching at the feet of a damsel, is the valiant Laurcalco,
lord of the Silver Bridge; that one in armour with flowers of gold,
who bears on his shield three crowns argent on an azure field, is the
dreaded Micocolembo, grand duke of Quirocia; that other of gigantic
frame, on his right hand, is the ever dauntless Brandabarbaran de
Boliche, lord of the three Arabias, who for armour wears that serpent
skin, and has for shield a gate which, according to tradition, is one
of those of the temple that Samson brought to the ground when by his
death he revenged himself upon his enemies. But turn thine eyes to the
other side, and thou shalt see in front and in the van of this other
army the ever victorious and never vanquished Timonel of Carcajona,
prince of New Biscay, who comes in armour with arms quartered azure,
vert, white, and yellow, and bears on his shield a cat or on a field
tawny with a motto which says Miau, which is the beginning of the name
of his lady, who according to report is the peerless Miaulina,
daughter of the duke Alfeniquen of the Algarve; the other, who burdens
and presses the loins of that powerful charger and bears arms white as
snow and a shield blank and without any device, is a novice knight, a
Frenchman by birth, Pierres Papin by name, lord of the baronies of
Utrique; that other, who with iron-shod heels strikes the flanks of
that nimble parti-coloured zebra, and for arms bears azure vair, is
the mighty duke of Nerbia, Espartafilardo del Bosque, who bears for
device on his shield an asparagus plant with a motto in Castilian that
says, Rastrea mi suerte." And so he went on naming a number of knights
of one squadron or the other out of his imagination, and to all he
assigned off-hand their arms, colours, devices, and mottoes, carried
away by the illusions of his unheard-of craze; and without a pause, he
continued, "People of divers nations compose this squadron in front;
here are those that drink of the sweet waters of the famous Xanthus,
those that scour the woody Massilian plains, those that sift the pure
fine gold of Arabia Felix, those that enjoy the famed cool banks of
the crystal Thermodon, those that in many and various ways divert the
streams of the golden Pactolus, the Numidians, faithless in their
promises, the Persians renowned in archery, the Parthians and the
Medes that fight as they fly, the Arabs that ever shift their
dwellings, the Scythians as cruel as they are fair, the Ethiopians
with pierced lips, and an infinity of other nations whose features I
recognise and descry, though I cannot recall their names. In this
other squadron there come those that drink of the crystal streams of
the olive-bearing Betis, those that make smooth their countenances
with the water of the ever rich and golden Tagus, those that rejoice
in the fertilising flow of the divine Genil, those that roam the
Tartesian plains abounding in pasture, those that take their pleasure
in the Elysian meadows of Jerez, the rich Manchegans crowned with
ruddy ears of corn, the wearers of iron, old relics of the Gothic
race, those that bathe in the Pisuerga renowned for its gentle
current, those that feed their herds along the spreading pastures of
the winding Guadiana famed for its hidden course, those that tremble
with the cold of the pineclad Pyrenees or the dazzling snows of the
lofty Apennine; in a word, as many as all Europe includes and
contains." Good God! what a number of countries and nations he named!
giving to each its proper attributes with marvellous readiness;
brimful and saturated with what he had read in his lying books! Sancho
Panza hung upon his words without speaking, and from time to time
turned to try if he could see the knights and giants his master was
describing, and as he could not make out one of them he said to him:
"Senor, devil take it if there's a sign of any man you talk of, knight
or giant, in the whole thing; maybe it's all enchantment, like the
phantoms last night." "How canst thou say that!" answered Don Quixote;
"dost thou not hear the neighing of the steeds, the braying of the
trumpets, the roll of the drums?" "I hear nothing but a great bleating
of ewes and sheep," said Sancho; which was true, for by this time the
two flocks had come close. "The fear thou art in, Sancho," said Don
Quixote, "prevents thee from seeing or hearing correctly, for one of
the effects of fear is to derange the senses and make things appear
different from what they are; if thou art in such fear, withdraw to
one side and leave me to myself, for alone I suffice to bring victory
to that side to which I shall give my aid;" and so saying he gave
Rocinante the spur, and Sancho followed him on foot and loaded, and
after having partly made the circuit of the mountain they found lying
in a ravine, dead and half devoured by dogs and pecked by jackdaws, a
mule saddled and bridled, all which still further strengthened their
suspicion that he who had fled was the owner of the mule and the
saddle-pad. As they stood looking at it they heard a whistle like that
of a shepherd watching his flock, and suddenly on their left there
appeared a great number of goats and behind them on the summit of the
mountain the goatherd in charge of them, a man advanced in years. Don
Quixote called aloud to him and begged him to come down to where they
stood. He shouted in return, asking what had brought them to that
spot, seldom or never trodden except by the feet of goats, or of the
wolves and other wild beasts that roamed around. Sancho in return bade
him come down, and they would explain all to him. The goatherd
descended, and reaching the place where Don Quixote stood, he said, "I
will wager you are looking at that hack mule that lies dead in the
hollow there, and, faith, it has been lying there now these six
months; tell me, have you come upon its master about here?" "We have
come upon nobody," answered Don Quixote, "nor on anything except a
saddle-pad and a little valise that we found not far from this." "I
found it too," said the goatherd, "but I would not lift it nor go near
it for fear of some ill-luck or being charged with theft, for the
devil is crafty, and things rise up under one's feet to make one fall
without knowing why or wherefore." "That's exactly what I say," said
Sancho; "I found it too, and I would not go within a stone's throw of
it; there I left it, and there it lies just as it was, for I don't
want a dog with a bell." "Tell me, good man," said Don Quixote, "do
you know who is the owner of this property?" "All I can tell you,"
said the goatherd, "is that about six months ago, more or less, there
arrived at a shepherd's hut three leagues, perhaps, away from this, a
youth of well-bred appearance and manners, mounted on that same mule
which lies dead here, and with the same saddle-pad and valise which
you say you found and did not touch. He asked us what part of this
sierra was the most rugged and retired; we told him that it was where
we now are; and so in truth it is, for if you push on half a league
farther, perhaps you will not be able to find your way out; and I am
wondering how you have managed to come here, for there is no road or
path that leads to this spot. I say, then, that on hearing our answer
the youth turned about and made for the place we pointed out to him,
leaving us all charmed with his good looks, and wondering at his
question and the haste with which we saw him depart in the direction
of the sierra; and after that we saw him no more, until some days
afterwards he crossed the path of one of our shepherds, and without
saying a word to him, came up to him and gave him several cuffs and
kicks, and then turned to the ass with our provisions and took all the
bread and cheese it carried, and having done this made off back again
into the sierra with extraordinary swiftness. When some of us
goatherds learned this we went in search of him for about two days
through the most remote portion of this sierra, at the end of which we
found him lodged in the hollow of a large thick cork tree. He came out
to meet us with great gentleness, with his dress now torn and his face
so disfigured and burned by the sun, that we hardly recognised him but
that his clothes, though torn, convinced us, from the recollection we
had of them, that he was the person we were looking for. He saluted us
courteously, and in a few well-spoken words he told us not to wonder
at seeing him going about in this guise, as it was binding upon him in
order that he might work out a penance which for his many sins had
been imposed upon him. We asked him to tell us who he was, but we were
never able to find out from him: we begged of him too, when he was in
want of food, which he could not do without, to tell us where we
should find him, as we would bring it to him with all good-will and
readiness; or if this were not to his taste, at least to come and ask
it of us and not take it by force from the shepherds. He thanked us
for the offer, begged pardon for the late assault, and promised for
the future to ask it in God's name without offering violence to
anybody. As for fixed abode, he said he had no other than that which
chance offered wherever night might overtake him; and his words ended
in an outburst of weeping so bitter that we who listened to him must
have been very stones had we not joined him in it, comparing what we
saw of him the first time with what we saw now; for, as I said, he was
a graceful and gracious youth, and in his courteous and polished
language showed himself to be of good birth and courtly breeding, and
rustics as we were that listened to him, even to our rusticity his
gentle bearing sufficed to make it plain. "But in the midst of his
conversation he stopped and became silent, keeping his eyes fixed upon
the ground for some time, during which we stood still waiting
anxiously to see what would come of this talk which he could not
understand; but when he perceived the wench struggling to get free and
Don Quixote striving to hold her, not relishing the joke he raised his
arm and delivered such a terrible cuff on the lank jaws of the amorous
knight that he bathed all his mouth in blood, and not content with
this he mounted on his ribs and with his feet tramped all over them at
a pace rather smarter than a trot. The bed which was somewhat crazy
and not very firm on its feet, unable to support the additional weight
of the carrier, came to the ground, and at the mighty crash of this
the innkeeper awoke and at once concluded that it must be some brawl
of Maritornes', because after calling loudly to her he got no answer.
With this suspicion he got up, and lighting a lamp hastened to the
quarter where he had heard the disturbance. The wench, seeing that her
master was coming and knowing that his temper was terrible, frightened
and panic-stricken made for the bed of Sancho Panza, who still slept,
and crouching upon it made a ball of herself. The innkeeper came in
exclaiming, "Where art thou, strumpet? Of course this is some of thy
work." At this Sancho awoke, and feeling this mass almost on top of
him fancied he had the nightmare and began to distribute fisticuffs
all round, of which a certain share fell upon Maritornes, who,
irritated by the pain and flinging modesty aside, paid back so many in
return to Sancho that she woke him up in spite of himself. He then,
finding himself so handled, by whom he knew not, raising himself up as
well as he could, grappled with Maritornes, and he and she between
them began the bitterest and drollest scrimmage in the world. The
carrier, however, perceiving by the light of the innkeeper candle how
it fared with his ladylove, quitting Don Quixote, ran to bring her the
help she needed; and the innkeeper did the same but with a different
intention, for his was to chastise the lass, as he believed that
beyond a doubt she alone was the cause of all the harmony. And so, as
the saying is, cat to rat, rat to rope, rope to stick, the carrier
pounded Sancho, Sancho the lass, she him, and the innkeeper her, and
all worked away so briskly that they did not give themselves a
moment's rest; and the best of it was that the innkeeper's lamp went
out, and as they were left in the dark they all laid on one upon the
other in a mass so unmercifully that there was not a sound spot left
where a hand could light. It so happened that there was lodging that
night in the inn a caudrillero of what they call the Old Holy
Brotherhood of Toledo, who, also hearing the extraordinary noise of
the conflict, seized his staff and the tin case with his warrants, and
made his way in the dark into the room crying: "Hold! in the name of
the Jurisdiction! Hold! in the name of the Holy Brotherhood!" The
first that he came upon was the pummelled Don Quixote, who lay
stretched senseless on his back upon his broken-down bed, and, his
hand falling on the beard as he felt about, he continued to cry, "Help
for the Jurisdiction!" but perceiving that he whom he had laid hold of
did not move or stir, he concluded that he was dead and that those in
the room were his murderers, and with this suspicion he raised his
voice still higher, calling out, "Shut the inn gate; see that no one
goes out; they have killed a man here!" This cry startled them all,
and each dropped the contest at the point at which the voice reached
him. The innkeeper retreated to his room, the carrier to his
pack-saddles, the lass to her crib; the unlucky Don Quixote and Sancho
alone were unable to move from where they were. The cuadrillero on
this let go Don Quixote's beard, and went out to look for a light to
search for and apprehend the culprits; but not finding one, as the
innkeeper had purposely extinguished the lantern on retreating to his
room, he was compelled to have recourse to the hearth, where after
much time and trouble he lit another lamp. CHAPTER XVII. IN WHICH ARE
CONTAINED THE INNUMERABLE TROUBLES WHICH THE BRAVE DON QUIXOTE AND HIS
GOOD SQUIRE SANCHO PANZA ENDURED IN THE INN, WHICH TO HIS MISFORTUNE
HE TOOK TO BE A CASTLE By this time Don Quixote had recovered from his
swoon; and in the same tone of voice in which he had called to his
squire the day before when he lay stretched "in the vale of the
stakes," he began calling to him now, "Sancho, my friend, art thou
asleep? sleepest thou, friend Sancho?" "How can I sleep, curses on
it!" returned Sancho discontentedly and bitterly, "when it is plain
that all the devils have been at me this night?" "Thou mayest well
believe that," answered Don Quixote, "because, either I know little,
or this castle is enchanted, for thou must know-but this that I am now
about to tell thee thou must swear to keep secret until after my
death." "I swear it," answered Sancho. "I say so," continued Don
Quixote, "because I hate taking away anyone's good name." "I say,"
replied Sancho, "that I swear to hold my tongue about it till the end
of your worship's days, and God grant I may be able to let it out
tomorrow." "Do I do thee such injuries, Sancho," said Don Quixote,
"that thou wouldst mount a scaffold in order to see the bulls without
danger." "To tell the truth," returned Sancho, "the monstrous nose of
that squire has filled me with fear and terror, and I dare not stay
near him." "It is," said Don Quixote, "such a one that were I not what
I am it would terrify me too; so, come, I will help thee up where thou
wilt." While Don Quixote waited for Sancho to mount into the cork tree
he of the Mirrors took as much ground as he considered requisite, and,
supposing Don Quixote to have done the same, without waiting for any
sound of trumpet or other signal to direct them, he wheeled his horse,
which was not more agile or better-looking than Rocinante, and at his
top speed, which was an easy trot, he proceeded to charge his enemy;
seeing him, however, engaged in putting Sancho up, he drew rein, and
halted in mid career, for which his horse was very grateful, as he was
already unable to go. Don Quixote, fancying that his foe was coming
down upon him flying, drove his spurs vigorously into Rocinante's lean
flanks and made him scud along in such style that the history tells us
that on this occasion only was he known to make something like
running, for on all others it was a simple trot with him; and with
this unparalleled fury he bore down where he of the Mirrors stood
digging his spurs into his horse up to buttons, without being able to
make him stir a finger's length from the spot where he had come to a
standstill in his course. At this lucky moment and crisis, Don Quixote
came upon his adversary, in trouble with his horse, and embarrassed
with his lance, which he either could not manage, or had no time to
lay in rest. Don Quixote, however, paid no attention to these
difficulties, and in perfect safety to himself and without any risk
encountered him of the Mirrors with such force that he brought him to
the ground in spite of himself over the haunches of his horse, and
with so heavy a fall that he lay to all appearance dead, not stirring
hand or foot. The instant Sancho saw him fall he slid down from the
cork tree, and made all haste to where his master was, who,
dismounting from Rocinante, went and stood over him of the Mirrors,
and unlacing his helmet to see if he was dead, and to give him air if
he should happen to be alive, he saw--who can say what he saw, without
filling all who hear it with astonishment, wonder, and awe? He saw,
the history says, the very countenance, the very face, the very look,
the very physiognomy, the very effigy, the very image of the bachelor
Samson Carrasco! As soon as he saw it he called out in a loud voice,
"Make haste here, Sancho, and behold what thou art to see but not to
believe; quick, my son, and learn what magic can do, and wizards and
enchanters are capable of." Sancho came up, and when he saw the
countenance of the bachelor Carrasco, he fell to crossing himself a
thousand times, and blessing himself as many more. All this time the
prostrate knight showed no signs of life, and Sancho said to Don
Quixote, "It is my opinion, senor, that in any case your worship
should take and thrust your sword into the mouth of this one here that
looks like the bachelor Samson Carrasco; perhaps in him you will kill
one of your enemies, the enchanters." "Thy advice is not bad," said
Don Quixote, "for of enemies the fewer the better;" and he was drawing
his sword to carry into effect Sancho's counsel and suggestion, when
the squire of the Mirrors came up, now without the nose which had made
him so hideous, and cried out in a loud voice, "Mind what you are
about, Senor Don Quixote; that is your friend, the bachelor Samson
Carrasco, you have at your feet, and I am his squire." "And the nose?"
said Sancho, seeing him without the hideous feature he had before; to
which he replied, "I have it here in my pocket," and putting his hand
into his right pocket, he pulled out a masquerade nose of varnished
pasteboard of the make already described; and Sancho, examining him
more and more closely, exclaimed aloud in a voice of amazement, "Holy
Mary be good to me! Isn't it Tom Cecial, my neighbour and gossip?"
"Why, to be sure I am!" returned the now unnosed squire; "Tom Cecial I
am, gossip and friend Sancho Panza; and I'll tell you presently the
means and tricks and falsehoods by which I have been brought here; but
in the meantime, beg and entreat of your master not to touch,
maltreat, wound, or slay the Knight of the Mirrors whom he has at his
feet; because, beyond all dispute, it is the rash and ill-advised
bachelor Samson Carrasco, our fellow townsman." At this moment he of
the Mirrors came to himself, and Don Quixote perceiving it, held the
naked point of his sword over his face, and said to him, "You are a
dead man, knight, unless you confess that the peerless Dulcinea del
Toboso excels your Casildea de Vandalia in beauty; and in addition to
this you must promise, if you should survive this encounter and fall,
to go to the city of El Toboso and present yourself before her on my
behalf, that she deal with you according to her good pleasure; and if
she leaves you free to do yours, you are in like manner to return and
seek me out (for the trail of my mighty deeds will serve you as a
guide to lead you to where I may be), and tell me what may have passed
between you and her-conditions which, in accordance with what we
stipulated before our combat, do not transgress the just limits of
knight-errantry." "I confess," said the fallen knight, "that the dirty
tattered shoe of the lady Dulcinea del Toboso is better than the
ill-combed though clean beard of Casildea; and I promise to go and to
return from her presence to yours, and to give you a full and
particular account of all you demand of me." "You must also confess
and believe," added Don Quixote, "that the knight you vanquished was
not and could not be Don Quixote of La Mancha, but some one else in
his likeness, just as I confess and believe that you, though you seem
to be the bachelor Samson Carrasco, are not so, but some other
resembling him, whom my enemies have here put before me in his shape,
in order that I may restrain and moderate the vehemence of my wrath,
and make a gentle use of the glory of my victory." "I confess, hold,
and think everything to be as you believe, hold, and think it," the
crippled knight; "let me rise, I entreat you; if, indeed, the shock of
my fall will allow me, for it has left me in a sorry plight enough."
Don Quixote helped him to rise, with the assistance of his squire Tom
Cecial; from whom Sancho never took his eyes, and to whom he put
questions, the replies to which furnished clear proof that he was
really and truly the Tom Cecial he said; but the impression made on
Sancho's mind by what his master said about the enchanters having
changed the face of the Knight of the Mirrors into that of the
bachelor Samson Carrasco, would not permit him to believe what he saw
with his eyes. In fine, both master and man remained under the
delusion; and, down in the mouth, and out of luck, he of the Mirrors
and his squire parted from Don Quixote and Sancho, he meaning to go
look for some village where he could plaster and strap his ribs. Don
Quixote and Sancho resumed their journey to Saragossa, and on it the
history leaves them in order that it may tell who the Knight of the
Mirrors and his long-nosed squire were. CHAPTER XV. WHEREIN IT IS TOLD
AND KNOWN WHO THE KNIGHT OF THE MIRRORS AND HIS SQUIRE WERE CHAPTER
XVI OF WHAT BEFELL DON QUIXOTE WITH A DISCREET GENTLEMAN OF LA MANCHA
CHAPTER XVII WHEREIN IS SHOWN THE FURTHEST AND HIGHEST POINT WHICH THE
UNEXAMPLED COURAGE OF DON QUIXOTE REACHED OR COULD REACH; TOGETHER
WITH THE HAPPILY ACHIEVED ADVENTURE OF THE LIONS CHAPTER XVIII OF WHAT
HAPPENED DON QUIXOTE IN THE CASTLE OR HOUSE OF THE KNIGHT OF THE GREEN
GABAN, TOGETHER WITH OTHER MATTERS OUT OF THE COMMON CHAPTER XIX IN
WHICH IS RELATED THE ADVENTURE OF THE ENAMOURED SHEPHERD, TOGETHER
WITH OTHER TRULY DROLL INCIDENTS Don Quixote had gone but a short
distance beyond Don Diego's village, when he fell in with a couple of
either priests or students, and a couple of peasants, mounted on four
beasts of the ass kind. One of the students carried, wrapped up in a
piece of green buckram by way of a portmanteau, what seemed to be a
little linen and a couple of pairs of-ribbed stockings; the other
carried nothing but a pair of new fencing-foils with buttons. The
peasants carried divers articles that showed they were on their way
from some large town where they had bought them, and were taking them
home to their village; and both students and peasants were struck with
the same amazement that everybody felt who saw Don Quixote for the
first time, and were dying to know who this man, so different from
ordinary men, could be. Don Quixote saluted them, and after
ascertaining that their road was the same as his, made them an offer
of his company, and begged them to slacken their pace, as their young
asses travelled faster than his horse; and then, to gratify them, he
told them in a few words who he was and the calling and profession he
followed, which was that of a knight-errant seeking adventures in all
parts of the world. He informed them that his own name was Don Quixote
of La Mancha, and that he was called, by way of surname, the Knight of
the Lions. All this was Greek or gibberish to the peasants, but not so
to the students, who very soon perceived the crack in Don Quixote's
pate; for all that, however, they regarded him with admiration and
respect, and one of them said to him, "If you, sir knight, have no
fixed road, as it is the way with those who seek adventures not to
have any, let your worship come with us; you will see one of the
finest and richest weddings that up to this day have ever been
celebrated in La Mancha, or for many a league round." Don Quixote
asked him if it was some prince's, that he spoke of it in this way.
"Not at all," said the student; "it is the wedding of a farmer and a
farmer's daughter, he the richest in all this country, and she the
fairest mortal ever set eyes on. The display with which it is to be
attended will be something rare and out of the common, for it will be
celebrated in a meadow adjoining the town of the bride, who is called,
par excellence, Quiteria the fair, as the bridegroom is called Camacho
the rich. She is eighteen, and he twenty-two, and they are fairly
matched, though some knowing ones, who have all the pedigrees in the
world by heart, will have it that the family of the fair Quiteria is
better than Camacho's; but no one minds that now-a-days, for wealth
can solder a great many flaws. At any rate, Camacho is free-handed,
and it is his fancy to screen the whole meadow with boughs and cover
it in overhead, so that the sun will have hard work if he tries to get
in to reach the grass that covers the soil. He has provided dancers
too, not only sword but also bell-dancers, for in his own town there
are those who ring the changes and jingle the bells to perfection; of
shoe-dancers I say nothing, for of them he has engaged a host. But
none of these things, nor of the many others I have omitted to
mention, will do more to make this a memorable wedding than the part
which I suspect the despairing Basilio will play in it. This Basilio
is a youth of the same village as Quiteria, and he lived in the house
next door to that of her parents, of which circumstance Love took
advantage to reproduce to the word the long-forgotten loves of Pyramus
and Thisbe; for Basilio loved Quiteria from his earliest years, and
she responded to his passion with countless modest proofs of
affection, so that the loves of the two children, Basilio and
Quiteria, were the talk and the amusement of the town. As they grew
up, the father of Quiteria made up his mind to refuse Basilio his
wonted freedom of access to the house, and to relieve himself of
constant doubts and suspicions, he arranged a match for his daughter
with the rich Camacho, as he did not approve of marrying her to
Basilio, who had not so large a share of the gifts of fortune as of
nature; for if the truth be told ungrudgingly, he is the most agile
youth we know, a mighty thrower of the bar, a first-rate wrestler, and
a great ball-player; he runs like a deer, and leaps better than a
goat, bowls over the nine-pins as if by magic, sings like a lark,
plays the guitar so as to make it speak, and, above all, handles a
sword as well as the best." "For that excellence alone," said Don
Quixote at this, "the youth deserves to marry, not merely the fair
Quiteria, but Queen Guinevere herself, were she alive now, in spite of
Launcelot and all who would try to prevent it." "Say that to my wife,"
said Sancho, who had until now listened in silence, "for she won't
hear of anything but each one marrying his equal, holding with the
proverb 'each ewe to her like.' What I would like is that this good
Basilio (for I am beginning to take a fancy to him already) should
marry this lady Quiteria; and a blessing and good luck--I meant to say
the opposite--on people who would prevent those who love one another
from marrying." "If all those who love one another were to marry,"
said Don Quixote, "it would deprive parents of the right to choose,
and marry their children to the proper person and at the proper time;
and if it was left to daughters to choose husbands as they pleased,
one would be for choosing her father's servant, and another, some one
she has seen passing in the street and fancies gallant and dashing,
though he may be a drunken bully; for love and fancy easily blind the
eyes of the judgment, so much wanted in choosing one's way of life;
and the matrimonial choice is very liable to error, and it needs great
caution and the special favour of heaven to make it a good one. He who
has to make a long journey, will, if he is wise, look out for some
trusty and pleasant companion to accompany him before he sets out.
Why, then, should not he do the same who has to make the whole journey
of life down to the final halting-place of death, more especially when
the companion has to be his companion in bed, at board, and
everywhere, as the wife is to her husband? The companionship of one's
wife is no article of merchandise, that, after it has been bought, may
be returned, or bartered, or changed; for it is an inseparable
accident that lasts as long as life lasts; it is a noose that, once
you put it round your neck, turns into a Gordian knot, which, if the
scythe of Death does not cut it, there is no untying. I could say a
great deal more on this subject, were I not prevented by the anxiety I
feel to know if the senor licentiate has anything more to tell about
the story of Basilio." To this the student, bachelor, or, as Don
Quixote called him, licentiate, replied, "I have nothing whatever to
say further, but that from the moment Basilio learned that the fair
Quiteria was to be married to Camacho the rich, he has never been seen
to smile, or heard to utter rational word, and he always goes about
moody and dejected, talking to himself in a way that shows plainly he
is out of his senses. He eats little and sleeps little, and all he
eats is fruit, and when he sleeps, if he sleeps at all, it is in the
field on the hard earth like a brute beast. Sometimes he gazes at the
sky, at other times he fixes his eyes on the earth in such an
abstracted way that he might be taken for a clothed statue, with its
drapery stirred by the wind. In short, he shows such signs of a heart
crushed by suffering, that all we who know him believe that when
to-morrow the fair Quiteria says 'yes,' it will be his sentence of
death." "God will guide it better," said Sancho, "for God who gives
the wound gives the salve; nobody knows what will happen; there are a
good many hours between this and to-morrow, and any one of them, or
any moment, the house may fall; I have seen the rain coming down and
the sun shining all at one time; many a one goes to bed in good health
who can't stir the next day. And tell me, is there anyone who can
boast of having driven a nail into the wheel of fortune? No, faith;
and between a woman's 'yes' and 'no' I wouldn't venture to put the
point of a pin, for there would not be room for it; if you tell me
Quiteria loves Basilio heart and soul, then I'll give him a bag of
good luck; for love, I have heard say, looks through spectacles that
make copper seem gold, poverty wealth, and blear eyes pearls." "What
art thou driving at, Sancho? curses on thee!" said Don Quixote; "for
when thou takest to stringing proverbs and sayings together, no one
can understand thee but Judas himself, and I wish he had thee. Tell
me, thou animal, what dost thou know about nails or wheels, or
anything else?" "Oh, if you don't understand me," replied Sancho, "it
is no wonder my words are taken for nonsense; but no matter; I
understand myself, and I know I have not said anything very foolish in
what I have said; only your worship, senor, is always gravelling at
everything I say, nay, everything I do." "Cavilling, not gravelling,"
said Don Quixote, "thou prevaricator of honest language, God confound
thee!" "Don't find fault with me, your worship," returned Sancho, "for
you know I have not been bred up at court or trained at Salamanca, to
know whether I am adding or dropping a letter or so in my words. Why!
God bless me, it's not fair to force a Sayago-man to speak like a
Toledan; maybe there are Toledans who do not hit it off when it comes
to polished talk." "That is true," said the licentiate, "for those who
have been bred up in the Tanneries and the Zocodover cannot talk like
those who are almost all day pacing the cathedral cloisters, and yet
they are all Toledans. Pure, correct, elegant and lucid language will
be met with in men of courtly breeding and discrimination, though they
may have been born in Majalahonda; I say of discrimination, because
there are many who are not so, and discrimination is the grammar of
good language, if it be accompanied by practice. I, sirs, for my sins
have studied canon law at Salamanca, and I rather pique myself on
expressing my meaning in clear, plain, and intelligible language." "If
you did not pique yourself more on your dexterity with those foils you
carry than on dexterity of tongue," said the other student, "you would
have been head of the degrees, where you are now tail." "Look here,
bachelor Corchuelo," returned the licentiate, "you have the most
mistaken idea in the world about skill with the sword, if you think it
useless." "It is no idea on my part, but an established truth,"
replied Corchuelo; "and if you wish me to prove it to you by
experiment, you have swords there, and it is a good opportunity; I
have a steady hand and a strong arm, and these joined with my
resolution, which is not small, will make you confess that I am not
mistaken. Dismount and put in practice your positions and circles and
angles and science, for I hope to make you see stars at noonday with
my rude raw swordsmanship, in which, next to God, I place my trust
that the man is yet to be born who will make me turn my back, and that
there is not one in the world I will not compel to give ground." "As
to whether you turn your back or not, I do not concern myself,"
replied the master of fence; "though it might be that your grave would
be dug on the spot where you planted your foot the first time; I mean
that you would be stretched dead there for despising skill with the
sword." "We shall soon see," replied Corchuelo, and getting off his
ass briskly, he drew out furiously one of the swords the licentiate
carried on his beast. "It must not be that way," said Don Quixote at
this point; "I will be the director of this fencing match, and judge
of this often disputed question;" and dismounting from Rocinante and
grasping his lance, he planted himself in the middle of the road, made
the welkin ring with words to this effect: "Ho ye travellers and
wayfarers, knights, squires, folk on foot or on horseback, who pass
this way or shall pass in the course of the next two days! Know that
Don Quixote of La Mancha, knight-errant, is posted here to maintain by
arms that the beauty and courtesy enshrined in the nymphs that dwell
in these meadows and groves surpass all upon earth, putting aside the
lady of my heart, Dulcinea del Toboso. Wherefore, let him who is of
the opposite opinion come on, for here I await him." Twice he repeated
the same words, and twice they fell unheard by any adventurer; but
fate, that was guiding affairs for him from better to better, so
ordered it that shortly afterwards there appeared on the road a crowd
of men on horseback, many of them with lances in their hands, all
riding in a compact body and in great haste. No sooner had those who
were with Don Quixote seen them than they turned about and withdrew to
some distance from the road, for they knew that if they stayed some
harm might come to them; but Don Quixote with intrepid heart stood his
ground, and Sancho Panza shielded himself with Rocinante's
hind-quarters. The troop of lancers came up, and one of them who was
in advance began shouting to Don Quixote, "Get out of the way, you son
of the devil, or these bulls will knock you to pieces!" "Rabble!"
returned Don Quixote, "I care nothing for bulls, be they the fiercest
Jarama breeds on its banks. Confess at once, scoundrels, that what I
have declared is true; else ye have to deal with me in combat." The
herdsman had no time to reply, nor Don Quixote to get out of the way
even if he wished; and so the drove of fierce bulls and tame bullocks,
together with the crowd of herdsmen and others who were taking them to
be penned up in a village where they were to be run the next day,
passed over Don Quixote and over Sancho, Rocinante and Dapple, hurling
them all to the earth and rolling them over on the ground. Sancho was
left crushed, Don Quixote scared, Dapple belaboured and Rocinante in
no very sound condition. They all got up, however, at length, and Don
Quixote in great haste, stumbling here and falling there, started off
running after the drove, shouting out, "Hold! stay! ye rascally
rabble, a single knight awaits you, and he is not of the temper or
opinion of those who say, 'For a flying enemy make a bridge of
silver.'" The retreating party in their haste, however, did not stop
for that, or heed his menaces any more than last year's clouds.
Weariness brought Don Quixote to a halt, and more enraged than avenged
he sat down on the road to wait until Sancho, Rocinante and Dapple
came up. When they reached him master and man mounted once more, and
without going back to bid farewell to the mock or imitation Arcadia,
and more in humiliation than contentment, they continued their
journey. CHAPTER LIX. WHEREIN IS RELATED THE STRANGE THING, WHICH MAY
BE REGARDED AS AN ADVENTURE, THAT HAPPENED DON QUIXOTE A clear limpid
spring which they discovered in a cool grove relieved Don Quixote and
Sancho of the dust and fatigue due to the unpolite behaviour of the
bulls, and by the side of this, having turned Dapple and Rocinante
loose without headstall or bridle, the forlorn pair, master and man,
seated themselves. Sancho had recourse to the larder of his alforjas
and took out of them what he called the prog; Don Quixote rinsed his
mouth and bathed his face, by which cooling process his flagging
energies were revived. Out of pure vexation he remained without
eating, and out of pure politeness Sancho did not venture to touch a
morsel of what was before him, but waited for his master to act as
taster. Seeing, however, that, absorbed in thought, he was forgetting
to carry the bread to his mouth, he said never a word, and trampling
every sort of good breeding under foot, began to stow away in his
paunch the bread and cheese that came to his hand. "Eat, Sancho my
friend," said Don Quixote; "support life, which is of more consequence
to thee than to me, and leave me to die under the pain of my thoughts
and pressure of my misfortunes. I was born, Sancho, to live dying, and
thou to die eating; and to prove the truth of what I say, look at me,
printed in histories, famed in arms, courteous in behaviour, honoured
by princes, courted by maidens; and after all, when I looked forward
to palms, triumphs, and crowns, won and earned by my valiant deeds, I
have this morning seen myself trampled on, kicked, and crushed by the
feet of unclean and filthy animals. This thought blunts my teeth,
paralyses my jaws, cramps my hands, and robs me of all appetite for
food; so much so that I have a mind to let myself die of hunger, the
cruelest death of all deaths." "So then," said Sancho, munching hard
all the time, "your worship does not agree with the proverb that says,
'Let Martha die, but let her die with a full belly.' I, at any rate,
have no mind to kill myself; so far from that, I mean to do as the
cobbler does, who stretches the leather with his teeth until he makes
it reach as far as he wants. I'll stretch out my life by eating until
it reaches the end heaven has fixed for it; and let me tell you,
senor, there's no greater folly than to think of dying of despair as
your worship does; take my advice, and after eating lie down and sleep
a bit on this green grass-mattress, and you will see that when you
awake you'll feel something better." Don Quixote did as he
recommended, for it struck him that Sancho's reasoning was more like a
philosopher's than a blockhead's, and said he, "Sancho, if thou wilt
do for me what I am going to tell thee my ease of mind would be more
assured and my heaviness of heart not so great; and it is this; to go
aside a little while I am sleeping in accordance with thy advice, and,
making bare thy carcase to the air, to give thyself three or four
hundred lashes with Rocinante's reins, on account of the three
thousand and odd thou art to give thyself for the disenchantment of
Dulcinea; for it is a great pity that the poor lady should be left
enchanted through thy carelessness and negligence." "There is a good
deal to be said on that point," said Don Quixote; "God knows whether
there be any Dulcinea or not in the world, or whether she is imaginary
or not imaginary; these are things the proof of which must not be
pushed to extreme lengths. I have not begotten nor given birth to my
lady, though I behold her as she needs must be, a lady who contains in
herself all the qualities to make her famous throughout the world,
beautiful without blemish, dignified without haughtiness, tender and
yet modest, gracious from courtesy and courteous from good breeding,
and lastly, of exalted lineage, because beauty shines forth and excels
with a higher degree of perfection upon good blood than in the fair of
lowly birth." "That is true," said the duke; "but Senor Don Quixote
will give me leave to say what I am constrained to say by the story of
his exploits that I have read, from which it is to be inferred that,
granting there is a Dulcinea in El Toboso, and that she is living
to-day, and that she is beautiful and nobly born and deserves to have
such a knight as Senor Don Quixote in her service, and that is the
highest praise that it is in my power to give her or that I can think
of. But I cannot help entertaining a doubt, and having a certain
grudge against Sancho Panza; the doubt is this, that the aforesaid
history declares that the said Sancho Panza, when he carried a letter
on your worship's behalf to the said lady Dulcinea, found her sifting
a sack of wheat; and more by token it says it was red wheat; a thing
which makes me doubt the loftiness of her lineage." To this Don
Quixote made answer, "Senora, your highness must know that everything
or almost everything that happens me transcends the ordinary limits of
what happens to other knights-errant; whether it be that it is
directed by the inscrutable will of destiny, or by the malice of some
jealous enchanter. Now it is an established fact that all or most
famous knights-errant have some special gift, one that of being proof
against enchantment, another that of being made of such invulnerable
flesh that he cannot be wounded, as was the famous Roland, one of the
twelve peers of France, of whom it is related that he could not be
wounded except in the sole of his left foot, and that it must be with
the point of a stout pin and not with any other sort of weapon
whatever; and so, when Bernardo del Carpio slew him at Roncesvalles,
finding that he could not wound him with steel, he lifted him up from
the ground in his arms and strangled him, calling to mind seasonably
the death which Hercules inflicted on Antaeus, the fierce giant that
they say was the son of Terra. I would infer from what I have
mentioned that perhaps I may have some gift of this kind, not that of
being invulnerable, because experience has many times proved to me
that I am of tender flesh and not at all impenetrable; nor that of
being proof against enchantment, for I have already seen myself thrust
into a cage, in which all the world would not have been able to
confine me except by force of enchantments. But as I delivered myself
from that one, I am inclined to believe that there is no other that
can hurt me; and so, these enchanters, seeing that they cannot exert
their vile craft against my person, revenge themselves on what I love
most, and seek to rob me of life by maltreating that of Dulcinea in
whom I live; and therefore I am convinced that when my squire carried
my message to her, they changed her into a common peasant girl,
engaged in such a mean occupation as sifting wheat; I have already
said, however, that that wheat was not red wheat, nor wheat at all,
but grains of orient pearl. And as a proof of all this, I must tell
your highnesses that, coming to El Toboso a short time back, I was
altogether unable to discover the palace of Dulcinea; and that the
next day, though Sancho, my squire, saw her in her own proper shape,
which is the fairest in the world, to me she appeared to be a coarse,
ill-favoured farm-wench, and by no means a well-spoken one, she who is
propriety itself. And so, as I am not and, so far as one can judge,
cannot be enchanted, she it is that is enchanted, that is smitten,
that is altered, changed, and transformed; in her have my enemies
revenged themselves upon me, and for her shall I live in ceaseless
tears, until I see her in her pristine state. I have mentioned this
lest anybody should mind what Sancho said about Dulcinea's winnowing
or sifting; for, as they changed her to me, it is no wonder if they
changed her to him. Dulcinea is illustrious and well-born, and of one
of the gentle families of El Toboso, which are many, ancient, and
good. Therein, most assuredly, not small is the share of the peerless
Dulcinea, through whom her town will be famous and celebrated in ages
to come, as Troy was through Helen, and Spain through La Cava, though
with a better title and tradition. For another thing; I would have
your graces understand that Sancho Panza is one of the drollest
squires that ever served knight-errant; sometimes there is a
simplicity about him so acute that it is an amusement to try and make
out whether he is simple or sharp; he has mischievous tricks that
stamp him rogue, and blundering ways that prove him a booby; he doubts
everything and believes everything; when I fancy he is on the point of
coming down headlong from sheer stupidity, he comes out with something
shrewd that sends him up to the skies. After all, I would not exchange
him for another squire, though I were given a city to boot, and
therefore I am in doubt whether it will be well to send him to the
government your highness has bestowed upon him; though I perceive in
him a certain aptitude for the work of governing, so that, with a
little trimming of his understanding, he would manage any government
as easily as the king does his taxes; and moreover, we know already
ample experience that it does not require much cleverness or much
learning to be a governor, for there are a hundred round about us that
scarcely know how to read, and govern like gerfalcons. The main point
is that they should have good intentions and be desirous of doing
right in all things, for they will never be at a loss for persons to
advise and direct them in what they have to do, like those
knight-governors who, being no lawyers, pronounce sentences with the
aid of an assessor. My advice to him will be to take no bribe and
surrender no right, and I have some other little matters in reserve,
that shall be produced in due season for Sancho's benefit and the
advantage of the island he is to govern." The duke, duchess, and Don
Quixote had reached this point in their conversation, when they heard
voices and a great hubbub in the palace, and Sancho burst abruptly
into the room all glowing with anger, with a straining-cloth by way of
a bib, and followed by several servants, or, more properly speaking,
kitchen-boys and other underlings, one of whom carried a small trough
full of water, that from its colour and impurity was plainly
dishwater. The one with the trough pursued him and followed him
everywhere he went, endeavouring with the utmost persistence to thrust
it under his chin, while another kitchen-boy seemed anxious to wash
his beard. "What is all this, brothers?" asked the duchess. "What is
it? What do you want to do to this good man? Do you forget he is a
governor-elect?" To which the barber kitchen-boy replied, "The
gentleman will not let himself be washed as is customary, and as my
lord and the senor his master have been." "Yes, I will," said Sancho,
in a great rage; "but I'd like it to be with cleaner towels, clearer
lye, and not such dirty hands; for there's not so much difference
between me and my master that he should be washed with angels' water
and I with devil's lye. The customs of countries and princes' palaces
are only good so long as they give no annoyance; but the way of
washing they have here is worse than doing penance. I have a clean
beard, and I don't require to be refreshed in that fashion, and
whoever comes to wash me or touch a hair of my head, I mean to say my
beard, with all due respect be it said, I'll give him a punch that
will leave my fist sunk in his skull; for cirimonies and soapings of
this sort are more like jokes than the polite attentions of one's
host." The duchess was ready to die with laughter when she saw
Sancho's rage and heard his words; but it was no pleasure to Don
Quixote to see him in such a sorry trim, with the dingy towel about
him, and the hangers-on of the kitchen all round him; so making a low
bow to the duke and duchess, as if to ask their permission to speak,
he addressed the rout in a dignified tone: "Holloa, gentlemen! you let
that youth alone, and go back to where you came from, or anywhere else
if you like; my squire is as clean as any other person, and those
troughs are as bad as narrow thin-necked jars to him; take my advice
and leave him alone, for neither he nor I understand joking." Sancho
took the word out of his mouth and went on, "Nay, let them come and
try their jokes on the country bumpkin, for it's about as likely I'll
stand them as that it's now midnight! Let them bring me a comb here,
or what they please, and curry this beard of mine, and if they get
anything out of it that offends against cleanliness, let them clip me
to the skin." Upon this, the duchess, laughing all the while, said,
"Sancho Panza is right, and always will be in all he says; he is
clean, and, as he says himself, he does not require to be washed; and
if our ways do not please him, he is free to choose. Besides, you
promoters of cleanliness have been excessively careless and
thoughtless, I don't know if I ought not to say audacious, to bring
troughs and wooden utensils and kitchen dishclouts, instead of basins
and jugs of pure gold and towels of holland, to such a person and such
a beard; but, after all, you are ill-conditioned and ill-bred, and
spiteful as you are, you cannot help showing the grudge you have
against the squires of knights-errant." The impudent servitors, and
even the seneschal who came with them, took the duchess to be speaking
in earnest, so they removed the straining-cloth from Sancho's neck,
and with something like shame and confusion of face went off all of
them and left him; whereupon he, seeing himself safe out of that
extreme danger, as it seemed to him, ran and fell on his knees before
the duchess, saying, "From great ladies great favours may be looked
for; this which your grace has done me today cannot be requited with
less than wishing I was dubbed a knight-errant, to devote myself all
the days of my life to the service of so exalted a lady. I am a
labouring man, my name is Sancho Panza, I am married, I have children,
and I am serving as a squire; if in any one of these ways I can serve
your highness, I will not be longer in obeying than your grace in
commanding." "It is easy to see, Sancho," replied the duchess, "that
you have learned to be polite in the school of politeness itself; I
mean to say it is easy to see that you have been nursed in the bosom
of Senor Don Quixote, who is, of course, the cream of good breeding
and flower of ceremony--or cirimony, as you would say yourself. Fair
be the fortunes of such a master and such a servant, the one the
cynosure of knight-errantry, the other the star of squirely fidelity!
Rise, Sancho, my friend; I will repay your courtesy by taking care
that my lord the duke makes good to you the promised gift of the
government as soon as possible." With this, the conversation came to
an end, and Don Quixote retired to take his midday sleep; but the
duchess begged Sancho, unless he had a very great desire to go to
sleep, to come and spend the afternoon with her and her damsels in a
very cool chamber. Sancho replied that, though he certainly had the
habit of sleeping four or five hours in the heat of the day in summer,
to serve her excellence he would try with all his might not to sleep
even one that day, and that he would come in obedience to her command,
and with that he went off. The duke gave fresh orders with respect to
treating Don Quixote as a knight-errant, without departing even in
smallest particular from the style in which, as the stories tell us,
they used to treat the knights of old. CHAPTER XXXIII. OF THE
DELECTABLE DISCOURSE WHICH THE DUCHESS AND HER DAMSELS HELD WITH
SANCHO PANZA, WELL WORTH READING AND NOTING CHAPTER XXXIV WHICH
RELATES HOW THEY LEARNED THE WAY IN WHICH THEY WERE TO DISENCHANT THE
PEERLESS DULCINEA DEL TOBOSO, WHICH IS ONE OF THE RAREST ADVENTURES IN
THIS BOOK CHAPTER XXXV WHEREIN IS CONTINUED THE INSTRUCTION GIVEN TO
DON QUIXOTE TOUCHING THE DISENCHANTMENT OF DULCINEA, TOGETHER WITH
OTHER MARVELLOUS INCIDENTS They saw advancing towards them, to the
sound of this pleasing music, what they call a triumphal car, drawn by
six grey mules with white linen housings, on each of which was mounted
a penitent, robed also in white, with a large lighted wax taper in his
hand. The car was twice or, perhaps, three times as large as the
former ones, and in front and on the sides stood twelve more
penitents, all as white as snow and all with lighted tapers, a
spectacle to excite fear as well as wonder; and on a raised throne was
seated a nymph draped in a multitude of silver-tissue veils with an
embroidery of countless gold spangles glittering all over them, that
made her appear, if not richly, at least brilliantly, apparelled. She
had her face covered with thin transparent sendal, the texture of
which did not prevent the fair features of a maiden from being
distinguished, while the numerous lights made it possible to judge of
her beauty and of her years, which seemed to be not less than
seventeen but not to have yet reached twenty. Beside her was a figure
in a robe of state, as they call it, reaching to the feet, while the
head was covered with a black veil. But the instant the car was
opposite the duke and duchess and Don Quixote the music of the
clarions ceased, and then that of the lutes and harps on the car, and
the figure in the robe rose up, and flinging it apart and removing the
veil from its face, disclosed to their eyes the shape of Death itself,
fleshless and hideous, at which sight Don Quixote felt uneasy, Sancho
frightened, and the duke and duchess displayed a certain trepidation.
Having risen to its feet, this living death, in a sleepy voice and
with a tongue hardly awake, held forth as follows: I am that Merlin
who the legends say The devil had for father, and the lie Hath
gathered credence with the lapse of time. Of magic prince, of
Zoroastric lore Monarch and treasurer, with jealous eye I view the
efforts of the age to hide The gallant deeds of doughty errant
knights, Who are, and ever have been, dear to me. Enchanters and
magicians and their kind Are mostly hard of heart; not so am I; For
mine is tender, soft, compassionate, And its delight is doing good to
all. In the dim caverns of the gloomy Dis, Where, tracing mystic lines
and characters, My soul abideth now, there came to me The sorrow-laden
plaint of her, the fair, The peerless Dulcinea del Toboso. I knew of
her enchantment and her fate, From high-born dame to peasant wench
transformed And touched with pity, first I turned the leaves Of
countless volumes of my devilish craft, And then, in this grim grisly
skeleton Myself encasing, hither have I come To show where lies the
fitting remedy To give relief in such a piteous case. O thou, the
pride and pink of all that wear The adamantine steel! O shining light,
O beacon, polestar, path and guide of all Who, scorning slumber and
the lazy down, Adopt the toilsome life of bloodstained arms! To thee,
great hero who all praise transcends, La Mancha's lustre and Iberia's
star, Don Quixote, wise as brave, to thee I say-- For peerless
Dulcinea del Toboso Her pristine form and beauty to regain, 'T is
needful that thy esquire Sancho shall, On his own sturdy buttocks
bared to heaven, Three thousand and three hundred lashes lay, And that
they smart and sting and hurt him well. Thus have the authors of her
woe resolved. And this is, gentles, wherefore I have come. "By all
that's good," exclaimed Sancho at this, "I'll just as soon give myself
three stabs with a dagger as three, not to say three thousand, lashes.
The devil take such a way of disenchanting! I don't see what my
backside has got to do with enchantments. By God, if Senor Merlin has
not found out some other way of disenchanting the lady Dulcinea del
Toboso, she may go to her grave enchanted." "But I'll take you, Don
Clown stuffed with garlic," said Don Quixote, "and tie you to a tree
as naked as when your mother brought you forth, and give you, not to
say three thousand three hundred, but six thousand six hundred lashes,
and so well laid on that they won't be got rid of if you try three
thousand three hundred times; don't answer me a word or I'll tear your
soul out." On hearing this Merlin said, "That will not do, for the
lashes worthy Sancho has to receive must be given of his own free will
and not by force, and at whatever time he pleases, for there is no
fixed limit assigned to him; but it is permitted him, if he likes to
commute by half the pain of this whipping, to let them be given by the
hand of another, though it may be somewhat weighty." "Not a hand, my
own or anybody else's, weighty or weighable, shall touch me," said
Sancho. "Was it I that gave birth to the lady Dulcinea del Toboso,
that my backside is to pay for the sins of her eyes? My master,
indeed, that's a part of her--for, he's always calling her 'my life'
and 'my soul,' and his stay and prop--may and ought to whip himself
for her and take all the trouble required for her disenchantment. But
for me to whip myself! Abernuncio!" As soon as Sancho had done
speaking the nymph in silver that was at the side of Merlin's ghost
stood up, and removing the thin veil from her face disclosed one that
seemed to all something more than exceedingly beautiful; and with a
masculine freedom from embarrassment and in a voice not very like a
lady's, addressing Sancho directly, said, "Thou wretched squire, soul
of a pitcher, heart of a cork tree, with bowels of flint and pebbles;
if, thou impudent thief, they bade thee throw thyself down from some
lofty tower; if, enemy of mankind, they asked thee to swallow a dozen
of toads, two of lizards, and three of adders; if they wanted thee to
slay thy wife and children with a sharp murderous scimitar, it would
be no wonder for thee to show thyself stubborn and squeamish. But to
make a piece of work about three thousand three hundred lashes, what
every poor little charity-boy gets every month--it is enough to amaze,
astonish, astound the compassionate bowels of all who hear it, nay,
all who come to hear it in the course of time. Turn, O miserable,
hard-hearted animal, turn, I say, those timorous owl's eyes upon these
of mine that are compared to radiant stars, and thou wilt see them
weeping trickling streams and rills, and tracing furrows, tracks, and
paths over the fair fields of my cheeks. Let it move thee, crafty,
ill-conditioned monster, to see my blooming youth--still in its teens,
for I am not yet twenty--wasting and withering away beneath the husk
of a rude peasant wench; and if I do not appear in that shape now, it
is a special favour Senor Merlin here has granted me, to the sole end
that my beauty may soften thee; for the tears of beauty in distress
turn rocks into cotton and tigers into ewes. Lay on to that hide of
thine, thou great untamed brute, rouse up thy lusty vigour that only
urges thee to eat and eat, and set free the softness of my flesh, the
gentleness of my nature, and the fairness of my face. And if thou wilt
not relent or come to reason for me, do so for the sake of that poor
knight thou hast beside thee; thy master I mean, whose soul I can this
moment see, how he has it stuck in his throat not ten fingers from his
lips, and only waiting for thy inflexible or yielding reply to make
its escape by his mouth or go back again into his stomach." Don
Quixote on hearing this felt his throat, and turning to the duke he
said, "By God, senor, Dulcinea says true, I have my soul stuck here in
my throat like the nut of a crossbow." "What say you to this, Sancho?"
said the duchess. "I say, senora," returned Sancho, "what I said
before; as for the lashes, abernuncio!" "Abrenuncio, you should say,
Sancho, and not as you do," said the duke. "Let me alone, your
highness," said Sancho. "I'm not in a humour now to look into niceties
or a letter more or less, for these lashes that are to be given me, or
I'm to give myself, have so upset me, that I don't know what I'm
saying or doing. But I'd like to know of this lady, my lady Dulcinea
del Toboso, where she learned this way she has of asking favours. She
comes to ask me to score my flesh with lashes, and she calls me soul
of a pitcher, and great untamed brute, and a string of foul names that
the devil is welcome to. Is my flesh brass? or is it anything to me
whether she is enchanted or not? Does she bring with her a basket of
fair linen, shirts, kerchiefs, socks-not that wear any--to coax me?
No, nothing but one piece of abuse after another, though she knows the
proverb they have here that 'an ass loaded with gold goes lightly up a
mountain,' and that 'gifts break rocks,' and 'praying to God and
plying the hammer,' and that 'one "take" is better than two "I'll give
thee's."' Then there's my master, who ought to stroke me down and pet
me to make me turn wool and carded cotton; he says if he gets hold of
me he'll tie me naked to a tree and double the tale of lashes on me.
These tender-hearted gentry should consider that it's not merely a
squire, but a governor they are asking to whip himself; just as if it
was 'drink with cherries.' Let them learn, plague take them, the right
way to ask, and beg, and behave themselves; for all times are not
alike, nor are people always in good humour. I'm now ready to burst
with grief at seeing my green coat torn, and they come to ask me to
whip myself of my own free will, I having as little fancy for it as
for turning cacique." "Well then, the fact is, friend Sancho," said
the duke, "that unless you become softer than a ripe fig, you shall
not get hold of the government. It would be a nice thing for me to
send my islanders a cruel governor with flinty bowels, who won't yield
to the tears of afflicted damsels or to the prayers of wise,
magisterial, ancient enchanters and sages. In short, Sancho, either
you must be whipped by yourself, or they must whip you, or you shan't
be governor." "Senor," said Sancho, "won't two days' grace be given me
in which to consider what is best for me?" "No, certainly not," said
Merlin; "here, this minute, and on the spot, the matter must be
settled; either Dulcinea will return to the cave of Montesinos and to
her former condition of peasant wench, or else in her present form
shall be carried to the Elysian fields, where she will remain waiting
until the number of stripes is completed." "Now then, Sancho!" said
the duchess, "show courage, and gratitude for your master Don
Quixote's bread that you have eaten; we are all bound to oblige and
please him for his benevolent disposition and lofty chivalry. Consent
to this whipping, my son; to the devil with the devil, and leave fear
to milksops, for 'a stout heart breaks bad luck,' as you very well
know." To this Sancho replied with an irrelevant remark, which,
addressing Merlin, he made to him, "Will your worship tell me, Senor
Merlin--when that courier devil came up he gave my master a message
from Senor Montesinos, charging him to wait for him here, as he was
coming to arrange how the lady Dona Dulcinea del Toboso was to be
disenchanted; but up to the present we have not seen Montesinos, nor
anything like him." To which Merlin made answer, "The devil, Sancho,
is a blockhead and a great scoundrel; I sent him to look for your
master, but not with a message from Montesinos but from myself; for
Montesinos is in his cave expecting, or more properly speaking,
waiting for his disenchantment; for there's the tail to be skinned yet
for him; if he owes you anything, or you have any business to transact
with him, I'll bring him to you and put him where you choose; but for
the present make up your mind to consent to this penance, and believe
me it will be very good for you, for soul as well for body--for your
soul because of the charity with which you perform it, for your body
because I know that you are of a sanguine habit and it will do you no
harm to draw a little blood." "There are a great many doctors in the
world; even the enchanters are doctors," said Sancho; "however, as
everybody tells me the same thing--though I can't see it myself--I say
I am willing to give myself the three thousand three hundred lashes,
provided I am to lay them on whenever I like, without any fixing of
days or times; and I'll try and get out of debt as quickly as I can,
that the world may enjoy the beauty of the lady Dulcinea del Toboso;
as it seems, contrary to what I thought, that she is beautiful after
all. It must be a condition, too, that I am not to be bound to draw
blood with the scourge, and that if any of the lashes happen to be
fly-flappers they are to count. Item, that, in case I should make any
mistake in the reckoning, Senor Merlin, as he knows everything, is to
keep count, and let me know how many are still wanting or over the
number." "There will be no need to let you know of any over," said
Merlin, "because, when you reach the full number, the lady Dulcinea
will at once, and that very instant, be disenchanted, and will come in
her gratitude to seek out the worthy Sancho, and thank him, and even
reward him for the good work. So you have no cause to be uneasy about
stripes too many or too few; heaven forbid I should cheat anyone of
even a hair of his head." "Well then, in God's hands be it," said
Sancho; "in the hard case I'm in I give in; I say I accept the penance
on the conditions laid down." The instant Sancho uttered these last
words the music of the clarions struck up once more, and again a host
of muskets were discharged, and Don Quixote hung on Sancho's neck
kissing him again and again on the forehead and cheeks. The duchess
and the duke expressed the greatest satisfaction, the car began to
move on, and as it passed the fair Dulcinea bowed to the duke and
duchess and made a low curtsey to Sancho. And now bright smiling dawn
came on apace; the flowers of the field, revived, raised up their
heads, and the crystal waters of the brooks, murmuring over the grey
and white pebbles, hastened to pay their tribute to the expectant
rivers; the glad earth, the unclouded sky, the fresh breeze, the clear
light, each and all showed that the day that came treading on the
skirts of morning would be calm and bright. The duke and duchess,
pleased with their hunt and at having carried out their plans so
cleverly and successfully, returned to their castle resolved to follow
up their joke; for to them there was no reality that could afford them
more amusement. CHAPTER XXXVI. WHEREIN IS RELATED THE STRANGE AND
UNDREAMT-OF ADVENTURE OF THE DISTRESSED DUENNA, ALIAS THE COUNTESS
TRIFALDI, TOGETHER WITH A LETTER WHICH SANCHO PANZA WROTE TO HIS WIFE,
TERESA PANZA CHAPTER XXXVII WHEREIN IS CONTINUED THE NOTABLE ADVENTURE
OF THE DISTRESSED DUENNA The duke and duchess were extremely glad to
see how readily Don Quixote fell in with their scheme; but at this
moment Sancho observed, "I hope this senora duenna won't be putting
any difficulties in the way of the promise of my government; for I
have heard a Toledo apothecary, who talked like a goldfinch, say that
where duennas were mixed up nothing good could happen. God bless me,
how he hated them, that same apothecary! And so what I'm thinking is,
if all duennas, of whatever sort or condition they may be, are plagues
and busybodies, what must they be that are distressed, like this
Countess Three-skirts or Three-tails!--for in my country skirts or
tails, tails or skirts, it's all one." "Hush, friend Sancho," said Don
Quixote; "since this lady duenna comes in quest of me from such a
distant land she cannot be one of those the apothecary meant; moreover
this is a countess, and when countesses serve as duennas it is in the
service of queens and empresses, for in their own houses they are
mistresses paramount and have other duennas to wait on them." To this
Dona Rodriguez, who was present, made answer, "My lady the duchess has
duennas in her service that might be countesses if it was the will of
fortune; 'but laws go as kings like;' let nobody speak ill of duennas,
above all of ancient maiden ones; for though I am not one myself, I
know and am aware of the advantage a maiden duenna has over one that
is a widow; but 'he who clipped us has kept the scissors.'" "For all
that," said Sancho, "there's so much to be clipped about duennas, so
my barber said, that 'it will be better not to stir the rice even
though it sticks.'" "These squires," returned Dona Rodriguez, "are
always our enemies; and as they are the haunting spirits of the
antechambers and watch us at every step, whenever they are not saying
their prayers (and that's often enough) they spend their time in
tattling about us, digging up our bones and burying our good name. But
I can tell these walking blocks that we will live in spite of them,
and in great houses too, though we die of hunger and cover our flesh,
be it delicate or not, with widow's weeds, as one covers or hides a
dunghill on a procession day. By my faith, if it were permitted me and
time allowed, I could prove, not only to those here present, but to
all the world, that there is no virtue that is not to be found in a
duenna." "I have no doubt," said the duchess, "that my good Dona
Rodriguez is right, and very much so; but she had better bide her time
for fighting her own battle and that of the rest of the duennas, so as
to crush the calumny of that vile apothecary, and root out the
prejudice in the great Sancho Panza's mind." To which Sancho replied,
"Ever since I have sniffed the governorship I have got rid of the
humours of a squire, and I don't care a wild fig for all the duennas
in the world." They would have carried on this duenna dispute further
had they not heard the notes of the fife and drums once more, from
which they concluded that the Distressed Duenna was making her
entrance. The duchess asked the duke if it would be possible to oblige
him with a pad of some kind, or a cushion; even if it were off the
couch of his lady the duchess, or the bed of one of the pages; as the
haunches of that horse were more like marble than wood. On this the
Trifaldi observed that Clavileno would not bear any kind of harness or
trappings, and that his best plan would be to sit sideways like a
woman, as in that way he would not feel the hardness so much. Sancho
did so, and, bidding them farewell, allowed his eyes to be bandaged,
but immediately afterwards uncovered them again, and looking tenderly
and tearfully on those in the garden, bade them help him in his
present strait with plenty of Paternosters and Ave Marias, that God
might provide some one to say as many for them, whenever they found
themselves in a similar emergency. At this Don Quixote exclaimed, "Art
thou on the gallows, thief, or at thy last moment, to use pitiful
entreaties of that sort? Cowardly, spiritless creature, art thou not
in the very place the fair Magalona occupied, and from which she
descended, not into the grave, but to become Queen of France; unless
the histories lie? And I who am here beside thee, may I not put myself
on a par with the valiant Pierres, who pressed this very spot that I
now press? Cover thine eyes, cover thine eyes, abject animal, and let
not thy fear escape thy lips, at least in my presence." "Blindfold
me," said Sancho; "as you won't let me commend myself or be commended
to God, is it any wonder if I am afraid there is a region of devils
about here that will carry us off to Peralvillo?" They were then
blindfolded, and Don Quixote, finding himself settled to his
satisfaction, felt for the peg, and the instant he placed his fingers
on it, all the duennas and all who stood by lifted up their voices
exclaiming, "God guide thee, valiant knight! God be with thee,
intrepid squire! Now, now ye go cleaving the air more swiftly than an
arrow! Now ye begin to amaze and astonish all who are gazing at you
from the earth! Take care not to wobble about, valiant Sancho! Mind
thou fall not, for thy fall will be worse than that rash youth's who
tried to steer the chariot of his father the Sun!" As Sancho heard the
voices, clinging tightly to his master and winding his arms round him,
he said, "Senor, how do they make out we are going up so high, if
their voices reach us here and they seem to be speaking quite close to
us?" "Don't mind that, Sancho," said Don Quixote; "for as affairs of
this sort, and flights like this are out of the common course of
things, you can see and hear as much as you like a thousand leagues
off; but don't squeeze me so tight or thou wilt upset me; and really I
know not what thou hast to be uneasy or frightened at, for I can
safely swear I never mounted a smoother-going steed all the days of my
life; one would fancy we never stirred from one place. Banish fear, my
friend, for indeed everything is going as it ought, and we have the
wind astern." "That's true," said Sancho, "for such a strong wind
comes against me on this side, that it seems as if people were blowing
on me with a thousand pair of bellows;" which was the case; they were
puffing at him with a great pair of bellows; for the whole adventure
was so well planned by the duke, the duchess, and their majordomo,
that nothing was omitted to make it perfectly successful. Don Quixote
now, feeling the blast, said, "Beyond a doubt, Sancho, we must have
already reached the second region of the air, where the hail and snow
are generated; the thunder, the lightning, and the thunderbolts are
engendered in the third region, and if we go on ascending at this
rate, we shall shortly plunge into the region of fire, and I know not
how to regulate this peg, so as not to mount up where we shall be
burned." And now they began to warm their faces, from a distance, with
tow that could be easily set on fire and extinguished again, fixed on
the end of a cane. On feeling the heat Sancho said, "May I die if we
are not already in that fire place, or very near it, for a good part
of my beard has been singed, and I have a mind, senor, to uncover and
see whereabouts we are." "Do nothing of the kind," said Don Quixote;
"remember the true story of the licentiate Torralva that the devils
carried flying through the air riding on a stick with his eyes shut;
who in twelve hours reached Rome and dismounted at Torre di Nona,
which is a street of the city, and saw the whole sack and storming and
the death of Bourbon, and was back in Madrid the next morning, where
he gave an account of all he had seen; and he said moreover that as he
was going through the air, the devil bade him open his eyes, and he
did so, and saw himself so near the body of the moon, so it seemed to
him, that he could have laid hold of it with his hand, and that he did
not dare to look at the earth lest he should be seized with giddiness.
So that, Sancho, it will not do for us to let the sun find us in the
street; it will be better for us to stay quiet, and let every jade
mind her spinning, and let us go to dinner." Good God, what was the
indignation of Don Quixote when he heard the audacious words of his
squire! So great was it, that in a voice inarticulate with rage, with
a stammering tongue, and eyes that flashed living fire, he exclaimed,
"Rascally clown, boorish, insolent, and ignorant, ill-spoken,
foul-mouthed, impudent backbiter and slanderer! Hast thou dared to
utter such words in my presence and in that of these illustrious
ladies? Hast thou dared to harbour such gross and shameless thoughts
in thy muddled imagination? Begone from my presence, thou born
monster, storehouse of lies, hoard of untruths, garner of knaveries,
inventor of scandals, publisher of absurdities, enemy of the respect
due to royal personages! Begone, show thyself no more before me under
pain of my wrath;" and so saying he knitted his brows, puffed out his
cheeks, gazed around him, and stamped on the ground violently with his
right foot, showing in every way the rage that was pent up in his
heart; and at his words and furious gestures Sancho was so scared and
terrified that he would have been glad if the earth had opened that
instant and swallowed him, and his only thought was to turn round and
make his escape from the angry presence of his master. But the
ready-witted Dorothea, who by this time so well understood Don
Quixote's humour, said, to mollify his wrath, "Be not irritated at the
absurdities your good squire has uttered, Sir Knight of the Rueful
Countenance, for perhaps he did not utter them without cause, and from
his good sense and Christian conscience it is not likely that he would
bear false witness against anyone. We may therefore believe, without
any hesitation, that since, as you say, sir knight, everything in this
castle goes and is brought about by means of enchantment, Sancho, I
say, may possibly have seen, through this diabolical medium, what he
says he saw so much to the detriment of my modesty." "I swear by God
Omnipotent," exclaimed Don Quixote at this, "your highness has hit the
point; and that some vile illusion must have come before this sinner
of a Sancho, that made him see what it would have been impossible to
see by any other means than enchantments; for I know well enough, from
the poor fellow's goodness and harmlessness, that he is incapable of
bearing false witness against anybody." "True, no doubt," said Don
Fernando, "for which reason, Senor Don Quixote, you ought to forgive
him and restore him to the bosom of your favour, sicut erat in
principio, before illusions of this sort had taken away his senses."
Don Quixote said he was ready to pardon him, and the curate went for
Sancho, who came in very humbly, and falling on his knees begged for
the hand of his master, who having presented it to him and allowed him
to kiss it, gave him his blessing and said, "Now, Sancho my son, thou
wilt be convinced of the truth of what I have many a time told thee,
that everything in this castle is done by means of enchantment." "So
it is, I believe," said Sancho, "except the affair of the blanket,
which came to pass in reality by ordinary means." "Believe it not,"
said Don Quixote, "for had it been so, I would have avenged thee that
instant, or even now; but neither then nor now could I, nor have I
seen anyone upon whom to avenge thy wrong." They were all eager to
know what the affair of the blanket was, and the landlord gave them a
minute account of Sancho's flights, at which they laughed not a
little, and at which Sancho would have been no less out of countenance
had not his master once more assured him it was all enchantment. For
all that his simplicity never reached so high a pitch that he could
persuade himself it was not the plain and simple truth, without any
deception whatever about it, that he had been blanketed by beings of
flesh and blood, and not by visionary and imaginary phantoms, as his
master believed and protested. The illustrious company had now been
two days in the inn; and as it seemed to them time to depart, they
devised a plan so that, without giving Dorothea and Don Fernando the
trouble of going back with Don Quixote to his village under pretence
of restoring Queen Micomicona, the curate and the barber might carry
him away with them as they proposed, and the curate be able to take
his madness in hand at home; and in pursuance of their plan they
arranged with the owner of an oxcart who happened to be passing that
way to carry him after this fashion. They constructed a kind of cage
with wooden bars, large enough to hold Don Quixote comfortably; and
then Don Fernando and his companions, the servants of Don Luis, and
the officers of the Brotherhood, together with the landlord, by the
directions and advice of the curate, covered their faces and disguised
themselves, some in one way, some in another, so as to appear to Don
Quixote quite different from the persons he had seen in the castle.
This done, in profound silence they entered the room where he was
asleep, taking his his rest after the past frays, and advancing to
where he was sleeping tranquilly, not dreaming of anything of the kind
happening, they seized him firmly and bound him fast hand and foot, so
that, when he awoke startled, he was unable to move, and could only
marvel and wonder at the strange figures he saw before him; upon which
he at once gave way to the idea which his crazed fancy invariably
conjured up before him, and took it into his head that all these
shapes were phantoms of the enchanted castle, and that he himself was
unquestionably enchanted as he could neither move nor help himself;
precisely what the curate, the concoctor of the scheme, expected would
happen. Of all that were there Sancho was the only one who was at once
in his senses and in his own proper character, and he, though he was
within very little of sharing his master's infirmity, did not fail to
perceive who all these disguised figures were; but he did not dare to
open his lips until he saw what came of this assault and capture of
his master; nor did the latter utter a word, waiting to the upshot of
his mishap; which was that bringing in the cage, they shut him up in
it and nailed the bars so firmly that they could not be easily burst
open. They then took him on their shoulders, and as they passed out of
the room an awful voice--as much so as the barber, not he of the
pack-saddle but the other, was able to make it--was heard to say, "O
Knight of the Rueful Countenance, let not this captivity in which thou
art placed afflict thee, for this must needs be, for the more speedy
accomplishment of the adventure in which thy great heart has engaged
thee; the which shall be accomplished when the raging Manchegan lion
and the white Tobosan dove shall be linked together, having first
humbled their haughty necks to the gentle yoke of matrimony. And from
this marvellous union shall come forth to the light of the world brave
whelps that shall rival the ravening claws of their valiant father;
and this shall come to pass ere the pursuer of the flying nymph shall
in his swift natural course have twice visited the starry signs. And
thou, O most noble and obedient squire that ever bore sword at side,
beard on face, or nose to smell with, be not dismayed or grieved to
see the flower of knight-errantry carried away thus before thy very
eyes; for soon, if it so please the Framer of the universe, thou shalt
see thyself exalted to such a height that thou shalt not know thyself,
and the promises which thy good master has made thee shall not prove
false; and I assure thee, on the authority of the sage Mentironiana,
that thy wages shall be paid thee, as thou shalt see in due season.
Follow then the footsteps of the valiant enchanted knight, for it is
expedient that thou shouldst go to the destination assigned to both of
you; and as it is not permitted to me to say more, God be with thee;
for I return to that place I wot of;" and as he brought the prophecy
to a close he raised his voice to a high pitch, and then lowered it to
such a soft tone, that even those who knew it was all a joke were
almost inclined to take what they heard seriously. Don Quixote was
comforted by the prophecy he heard, for he at once comprehended its
meaning perfectly, and perceived it was promised to him that he should
see himself united in holy and lawful matrimony with his beloved
Dulcinea del Toboso, from whose blessed womb should proceed the
whelps, his sons, to the eternal glory of La Mancha; and being
thoroughly and firmly persuaded of this, he lifted up his voice, and
with a deep sigh exclaimed, "Oh thou, whoever thou art, who hast
foretold me so much good, I implore of thee that on my part thou
entreat that sage enchanter who takes charge of my interests, that he
leave me not to perish in this captivity in which they are now
carrying me away, ere I see fulfilled promises so joyful and
incomparable as those which have been now made me; for, let this but
come to pass, and I shall glory in the pains of my prison, find
comfort in these chains wherewith they bind me, and regard this bed
whereon they stretch me, not as a hard battle-field, but as a soft and
happy nuptial couch; and touching the consolation of Sancho Panza, my
squire, I rely upon his goodness and rectitude that he will not desert
me in good or evil fortune; for if, by his ill luck or mine, it may
not happen to be in my power to give him the island I have promised,
or any equivalent for it, at least his wages shall not be lost; for in
my will, which is already made, I have declared the sum that shall be
paid to him, measured, not by his many faithful services, but by the
means at my disposal." Sancho bowed his head very respectfully and
kissed both his hands, for, being tied together, he could not kiss
one; and then the apparitions lifted the cage upon their shoulders and
fixed it upon the ox-cart. CHAPTER XLVII. OF THE STRANGE MANNER IN
WHICH DON QUIXOTE OF LA MANCHA WAS CARRIED AWAY ENCHANTED, TOGETHER
WITH OTHER REMARKABLE INCIDENTS When Don Quixote saw himself caged and
hoisted on the cart in this way, he said, "Many grave histories of
knights-errant have I read; but never yet have I read, seen, or heard
of their carrying off enchanted knights-errant in this fashion, or at
the slow pace that these lazy, sluggish animals promise; for they
always take them away through the air with marvellous swiftness,
enveloped in a dark thick cloud, or on a chariot of fire, or it may be
on some hippogriff or other beast of the kind; but to carry me off
like this on an ox-cart! By God, it puzzles me! But perhaps the
chivalry and enchantments of our day take a different course from that
of those in days gone by; and it may be, too, that as I am a new
knight in the world, and the first to revive the already forgotten
calling of knight-adventurers, they may have newly invented other
kinds of enchantments and other modes of carrying off the enchanted.
What thinkest thou of the matter, Sancho my son?" "I don't know what
to think," answered Sancho, "not being as well read as your worship in
errant writings; but for all that I venture to say and swear that
these apparitions that are about us are not quite catholic."
"Catholic!" said Don Quixote. "Father of me! how can they be Catholic
when they are all devils that have taken fantastic shapes to come and
do this, and bring me to this condition? And if thou wouldst prove it,
touch them, and feel them, and thou wilt find they have only bodies of
air, and no consistency except in appearance." "By God, master,"
returned Sancho, "I have touched them already; and that devil, that
goes about there so busily, has firm flesh, and another property very
different from what I have heard say devils have, for by all accounts
they all smell of brimstone and other bad smells; but this one smells
of amber half a league off." Sancho was here speaking of Don Fernando,
who, like a gentleman of his rank, was very likely perfumed as Sancho
said. "Marvel not at that, Sancho my friend," said Don Quixote; "for
let me tell thee devils are crafty; and even if they do carry odours
about with them, they themselves have no smell, because they are
spirits; or, if they have any smell, they cannot smell of anything
sweet, but of something foul and fetid; and the reason is that as they
carry hell with them wherever they go, and can get no ease whatever
from their torments, and as a sweet smell is a thing that gives
pleasure and enjoyment, it is impossible that they can smell sweet;
if, then, this devil thou speakest of seems to thee to smell of amber,
either thou art deceiving thyself, or he wants to deceive thee by
making thee fancy he is not a devil." Such was the conversation that
passed between master and man; and Don Fernando and Cardenio,
apprehensive of Sancho's making a complete discovery of their scheme,
towards which he had already gone some way, resolved to hasten their
departure, and calling the landlord aside, they directed him to saddle
Rocinante and put the pack-saddle on Sancho's ass, which he did with
great alacrity. In the meantime the curate had made an arrangement
with the officers that they should bear them company as far as his
village, he paying them so much a day. Cardenio hung the buckler on
one side of the bow of Rocinante's saddle and the basin on the other,
and by signs commanded Sancho to mount his ass and take Rocinante's
bridle, and at each side of the cart he placed two officers with their
muskets; but before the cart was put in motion, out came the landlady
and her daughter and Maritornes to bid Don Quixote farewell,
pretending to weep with grief at his misfortune; and to them Don
Quixote said: "Weep not, good ladies, for all these mishaps are the
lot of those who follow the profession I profess; and if these
reverses did not befall me I should not esteem myself a famous
knight-errant; for such things never happen to knights of little
renown and fame, because nobody in the world thinks about them; to
valiant knights they do, for these are envied for their virtue and
valour by many princes and other knights who compass the destruction
of the worthy by base means. Nevertheless, virtue is of herself so
mighty, that, in spite of all the magic that Zoroaster its first
inventor knew, she will come victorious out of every trial, and shed
her light upon the earth as the sun does upon the heavens. Forgive me,
fair ladies, if, through inadvertence, I have in aught offended you;
for intentionally and wittingly I have never done so to any; and pray
to God that he deliver me from this captivity to which some malevolent
enchanter has consigned me; and should I find myself released
therefrom, the favours that ye have bestowed upon me in this castle
shall be held in memory by me, that I may acknowledge, recognise, and
requite them as they deserve." While this was passing between the
ladies of the castle and Don Quixote, the curate and the barber bade
farewell to Don Fernando and his companions, to the captain, his
brother, and the ladies, now all made happy, and in particular to
Dorothea and Luscinda. They all embraced one another, and promised to
let each other know how things went with them, and Don Fernando
directed the curate where to write to him, to tell him what became of
Don Quixote, assuring him that there was nothing that could give him
more pleasure than to hear of it, and that he too, on his part, would
send him word of everything he thought he would like to know, about
his marriage, Zoraida's baptism, Don Luis's affair, and Luscinda's
return to her home. The curate promised to comply with his request
carefully, and they embraced once more, and renewed their promises.
The landlord approached the curate and handed him some papers, saying
he had discovered them in the lining of the valise in which the novel
of "The Ill-advised Curiosity" had been found, and that he might take
them all away with him as their owner had not since returned; for, as
he could not read, he did not want them himself. The curate thanked
him, and opening them he saw at the beginning of the manuscript the
words, "Novel of Rinconete and Cortadillo," by which he perceived that
it was a novel, and as that of "The Ill-advised Curiosity" had been
good he concluded this would be so too, as they were both probably by
the same author; so he kept it, intending to read it when he had an
opportunity. He then mounted and his friend the barber did the same,
both masked, so as not to be recognised by Don Quixote, and set out
following in the rear of the cart. The order of march was this: first
went the cart with the owner leading it; at each side of it marched
the officers of the Brotherhood, as has been said, with their muskets;
then followed Sancho Panza on his ass, leading Rocinante by the
bridle; and behind all came the curate and the barber on their mighty
mules, with faces covered, as aforesaid, and a grave and serious air,
measuring their pace to suit the slow steps of the oxen. Don Quixote
was seated in the cage, with his hands tied and his feet stretched
out, leaning against the bars as silent and as patient as if he were a
stone statue and not a man of flesh. Thus slowly and silently they
made, it might be, two leagues, until they reached a valley which the
carter thought a convenient place for resting and feeding his oxen,
and he said so to the curate, but the barber was of opinion that they
ought to push on a little farther, as at the other side of a hill
which appeared close by he knew there was a valley that had more grass
and much better than the one where they proposed to halt; and his
advice was taken and they continued their journey. Just at that moment
the curate, looking back, saw coming on behind them six or seven
mounted men, well found and equipped, who soon overtook them, for they
were travelling, not at the sluggish, deliberate pace of oxen, but
like men who rode canons' mules, and in haste to take their noontide
rest as soon as possible at the inn which was in sight not a league
off. The quick travellers came up with the slow, and courteous
salutations were exchanged; and one of the new comers, who was, in
fact, a canon of Toledo and master of the others who accompanied him,
observing the regular order of the procession, the cart, the officers,
Sancho, Rocinante, the curate and the barber, and above all Don
Quixote caged and confined, could not help asking what was the meaning
of carrying the man in that fashion; though, from the badges of the
officers, he already concluded that he must be some desperate
highwayman or other malefactor whose punishment fell within the
jurisdiction of the Holy Brotherhood. One of the officers to whom he
had put the question, replied, "Let the gentleman himself tell you the
meaning of his going this way, senor, for we do not know." Don Quixote
overheard the conversation and said, "Haply, gentlemen, you are versed
and learned in matters of errant chivalry? Because if you are I will
tell you my misfortunes; if not, there is no good in my giving myself
the trouble of relating them;" but here the curate and the barber,
seeing that the travellers were engaged in conversation with Don
Quixote, came forward, in order to answer in such a way as to save
their stratagem from being discovered. The canon, replying to Don
Quixote, said, "In truth, brother, I know more about books of chivalry
than I do about Villalpando's elements of logic; so if that be all,
you may safely tell me what you please." "In God's name, then, senor,"
replied Don Quixote; "if that be so, I would have you know that I am
held enchanted in this cage by the envy and fraud of wicked
enchanters; for virtue is more persecuted by the wicked than loved by
the good. I am a knight-errant, and not one of those whose names Fame
has never thought of immortalising in her record, but of those who, in
defiance and in spite of envy itself, and all the magicians that
Persia, or Brahmans that India, or Gymnosophists that Ethiopia ever
produced, will place their names in the temple of immortality, to
serve as examples and patterns for ages to come, whereby
knights-errant may see the footsteps in which they must tread if they
would attain the summit and crowning point of honour in arms." "What
Senor Don Quixote of La Mancha says," observed the curate, "is the
truth; for he goes enchanted in this cart, not from any fault or sins
of his, but because of the malevolence of those to whom virtue is
odious and valour hateful. This, senor, is the Knight of the Rueful
Countenance, if you have ever heard him named, whose valiant
achievements and mighty deeds shall be written on lasting brass and
imperishable marble, notwithstanding all the efforts of envy to
obscure them and malice to hide them." When the canon heard both the
prisoner and the man who was at liberty talk in such a strain he was
ready to cross himself in his astonishment, and could not make out
what had befallen him; and all his attendants were in the same state
of amazement. At this point Sancho Panza, who had drawn near to hear
the conversation, said, in order to make everything plain, "Well,
sirs, you may like or dislike what I am going to say, but the fact of
the matter is, my master, Don Quixote, is just as much enchanted as my
mother. He is in his full senses, he eats and he drinks, and he has
his calls like other men and as he had yesterday, before they caged
him. And if that's the case, what do they mean by wanting me to
believe that he is enchanted? For I have heard many a one say that
enchanted people neither eat, nor sleep, nor talk; and my master, if
you don't stop him, will talk more than thirty lawyers." Then turning
to the curate he exclaimed, "Ah, senor curate, senor curate! do you
think I don't know you? Do you think I don't guess and see the drift
of these new enchantments? Well then, I can tell you I know you, for
all your face is covered, and I can tell you I am up to you, however
you may hide your tricks. After all, where envy reigns virtue cannot
live, and where there is niggardliness there can be no liberality. Ill
betide the devil! if it had not been for your worship my master would
be married to the Princess Micomicona this minute, and I should be a
count at least; for no less was to be expected, as well from the
goodness of my master, him of the Rueful Countenance, as from the
greatness of my services. But I see now how true it is what they say
in these parts, that the wheel of fortune turns faster than a
mill-wheel, and that those who were up yesterday are down to-day. I am
sorry for my wife and children, for when they might fairly and
reasonably expect to see their father return to them a governor or
viceroy of some island or kingdom, they will see him come back a
horse-boy. I have said all this, senor curate, only to urge your
paternity to lay to your conscience your ill-treatment of my master;
and have a care that God does not call you to account in another life
for making a prisoner of him in this way, and charge against you all
the succours and good deeds that my lord Don Quixote leaves undone
while he is shut up. "Trim those lamps there!" exclaimed the barber at
this; "so you are of the same fraternity as your master, too, Sancho?
By God, I begin to see that you will have to keep him company in the
cage, and be enchanted like him for having caught some of his humour
and chivalry. It was an evil hour when you let yourself be got with
child by his promises, and that island you long so much for found its
way into your head." "I am not with child by anyone," returned Sancho,
"nor am I a man to let myself be got with child, if it was by the King
himself. Though I am poor I am an old Christian, and I owe nothing to
nobody, and if I long for an island, other people long for worse. Each
of us is the son of his own works; and being a man I may come to be
pope, not to say governor of an island, especially as my master may
win so many that he will not know whom to give them to. Mind how you
talk, master barber; for shaving is not everything, and there is some
difference between Peter and Peter. I say this because we all know one
another, and it will not do to throw false dice with me; I am an old
dog, and I know all about 'tus, tus;' I can be wide-awake if need be,
and I don't let clouds come before my eyes, for I know where the shoe
pinches me; I say so, because with me the good will have support and
protection, and the bad neither footing nor access. And it seems to me
that, in governments, to make a beginning is everything; and maybe,
after having been governor a fortnight, I'll take kindly to the work
and know more about it than the field labour I have been brought up
to." "You are right, Sancho," said the duchess, "for no one is born
ready taught, and the bishops are made out of men and not out of
stones. But to return to the subject we were discussing just now, the
enchantment of the lady Dulcinea, I look upon it as certain, and
something more than evident, that Sancho's idea of practising a
deception upon his master, making him believe that Dulcinea was
enchanted and turned into a country wench; and of how the duchess, his
wife, had persuaded Sancho that it was he himself who was deceived,
inasmuch as Dulcinea was really enchanted; at which the bachelor
laughed not a little, and marvelled as well at the sharpness and
simplicity of Sancho as at the length to which Don Quixote's madness
went. The duke begged of him if he found him (whether he overcame him
or not) to return that way and let him know the result. This the
bachelor did; he set out in quest of Don Quixote, and not finding him
at Saragossa, he went on, and how he fared has been already told. He
returned to the duke's castle and told him all, what the conditions of
the combat were, and how Don Quixote was now, like a loyal
knight-errant, returning to keep his promise of retiring to his
village for a year, by which time, said the bachelor, he might perhaps
be cured of his madness; for that was the object that had led him to
adopt these disguises, as it was a sad thing for a gentleman of such
good parts as Don Quixote to be a madman. And so he took his leave of
the duke, and went home to his village to wait there for Don Quixote,
who was coming after him. Thereupon the duke seized the opportunity of
practising this mystification upon him; so much did he enjoy
everything connected with Sancho and Don Quixote. He had the roads
about the castle far and near, everywhere he thought Don Quixote was
likely to pass on his return, occupied by large numbers of his
servants on foot and on horseback, who were to bring him to the
castle, by fair means or foul, if they met him. They did meet him, and
sent word to the duke, who, having already settled what was to be
done, as soon as he heard of his arrival, ordered the torches and
lamps in the court to be lit and Altisidora to be placed on the
catafalque with all the pomp and ceremony that has been described, the
whole affair being so well arranged and acted that it differed but
little from reality. And Cide Hamete says, moreover, that for his part
he considers the concocters of the joke as crazy as the victims of it,
and that the duke and duchess were not two fingers' breadth removed
from being something like fools themselves when they took such pains
to make game of a pair of fools. As for the latter, one was sleeping
soundly and the other lying awake occupied with his desultory
thoughts, when daylight came to them bringing with it the desire to
rise; for the lazy down was never a delight to Don Quixote, victor or
vanquished. Altisidora, come back from death to life as Don Quixote
fancied, following up the freak of her lord and lady, entered the
chamber, crowned with the garland she had worn on the catafalque and
in a robe of white taffeta embroidered with gold flowers, her hair
flowing loose over her shoulders, and leaning upon a staff of fine
black ebony. Don Quixote, disconcerted and in confusion at her
appearance, huddled himself up and well-nigh covered himself
altogether with the sheets and counterpane of the bed, tongue-tied,
and unable to offer her any civility. Altisidora seated herself on a
chair at the head of the bed, and, after a deep sigh, said to him in a
feeble, soft voice, "When women of rank and modest maidens trample
honour under foot, and give a loose to the tongue that breaks through
every impediment, publishing abroad the inmost secrets of their
hearts, they are reduced to sore extremities. Such a one am I, Senor
Don Quixote of La Mancha, crushed, conquered, love-smitten, but yet
patient under suffering and virtuous, and so much so that my heart
broke with grief and I lost my life. For the last two days I have been
dead, slain by the thought of the cruelty with which thou hast treated
me, obdurate knight, O harder thou than marble to my plaint; or at
least believed to be dead by all who saw me; and had it not been that
Love, taking pity on me, let my recovery rest upon the sufferings of
this good squire, there I should have remained in the other world."
"Love might very well have let it rest upon the sufferings of my ass,
and I should have been obliged to him," said Sancho. "But tell me,
senora--and may heaven send you a tenderer lover than my master-what
did you see in the other world? What goes on in hell? For of course
that's where one who dies in despair is bound for." "To tell you the
truth," said Altisidora, "I cannot have died outright, for I did not
go into hell; had I gone in, it is very certain I should never have
come out again, do what I might. The truth is, I came to the gate,
where some dozen or so of devils were playing tennis, all in breeches
and doublets, with falling collars trimmed with Flemish bonelace, and
ruffles of the same that served them for wristbands, with four
fingers' breadth of the arms exposed to make their hands look longer;
in their hands they held rackets of fire; but what amazed me still
more was that books, apparently full of wind and rubbish, served them
for tennis balls, a strange and marvellous thing; this, however, did
not astonish me so much as to observe that, although with players it
is usual for the winners to be glad and the losers sorry, there in
that game all were growling, all were snarling, and all were cursing
one another." "That's no wonder," said Sancho; "for devils, whether
playing or not, can never be content, win or lose." "Very likely,"
said Altisidora; "but there is another thing that surprises me too, I
mean surprised me then, and that was that no ball outlasted the first
throw or was of any use a second time; and it was wonderful the
constant succession there was of books, new and old. To one of them, a
brand-new, well-bound one, they gave such a stroke that they knocked
the guts out of it and scattered the leaves about. 'Look what book
that is,' said one devil to another, and the other replied, 'It is the
"Second Part of the History of Don Quixote of La Mancha," not by Cide
Hamete, the original author, but by an Aragonese who by his own
account is of Tordesillas.' 'Out of this with it,' said the first,
'and into the depths of hell with it out of my sight.' 'Is it so bad?'
said the other. 'So bad is it,' said the first, 'that if I had set
myself deliberately to make a worse, I could not have done it.' They
then went on with their game, knocking other books about; and I,
having heard them mention the name of Don Quixote whom I love and
adore so, took care to retain this vision in my memory." "A vision it
must have been, no doubt," said Don Quixote, "for there is no other I
in the world; this history has been going about here for some time
from hand to hand, but it does not stay long in any, for everybody
gives it a taste of his foot. I am not disturbed by hearing that I am
wandering in a fantastic shape in the darkness of the pit or in the
daylight above, for I am not the one that history treats of. If it
should be good, faithful, and true, it will have ages of life; but if
it should be bad, from its birth to its burial will not be a very long
journey." Altisidora was about to proceed with her complaint against
Don Quixote, when he said to her, "I have several times told you,
senora that it grieves me you should have set your affections upon me,
as from mine they can only receive gratitude, but no return. I was
born to belong to Dulcinea del Toboso, and the fates, if there are
any, dedicated me to her; and to suppose that any other beauty can
take the place she occupies in my heart is to suppose an
impossibility. This frank declaration should suffice to make you
retire within the bounds of your modesty, for no one can bind himself
to do impossibilities." Hearing this, Altisidora, with a show of anger
and agitation, exclaimed, "God's life! Don Stockfish, soul of a
mortar, stone of a date, more obstinate and obdurate than a clown
asked a favour when he has his mind made up, if I fall upon you I'll
tear your eyes out! Do you fancy, Don Vanquished, Don Cudgelled, that
I died for your sake? All that you have seen to-night has been
make-believe; I'm not the woman to let the black of my nail suffer for
such a camel, much less die!" "That I can well believe," said Sancho;
"for all that about lovers pining to death is absurd; they may talk of
it, but as for doing it-Judas may believe that!" While they were
talking, the musician, singer, and poet, who had sung the two stanzas
given above came in, and making a profound obeisance to Don Quixote
said, "Will your worship, sir knight, reckon and retain me in the
number of your most faithful servants, for I have long been a great
admirer of yours, as well because of your fame as because of your
achievements?" "Will your worship tell me who you are," replied Don
Quixote, "so that my courtesy may be answerable to your deserts?" The
young man replied that he was the musician and songster of the night
before. "Of a truth," said Don Quixote, "your worship has a most
excellent voice; but what you sang did not seem to me very much to the
purpose; for what have Garcilasso's stanzas to do with the death of
this lady?" "Don't be surprised at that," returned the musician; "for
with the callow poets of our day the way is for every one to write as
he pleases and pilfer where he chooses, whether it be germane to the
matter or not, and now-a-days there is no piece of silliness they can
sing or write that is not set down to poetic licence." Don Quixote was
about to reply, but was prevented by the duke and duchess, who came in
to see him, and with them there followed a long and delightful
conversation, in the course of which Sancho said so many droll and
saucy things that he left the duke and duchess wondering not only at
his simplicity but at his sharpness. Don Quixote begged their
permission to take his departure that same day, inasmuch as for a
vanquished knight like himself it was fitter he should live in a
pig-sty than in a royal palace. They gave it very readily, and the
duchess asked him if Altisidora was in his good graces. He replied,
"Senora, let me tell your ladyship that this damsel's ailment comes
entirely of idleness, and the cure for it is honest and constant
employment. She herself has told me that lace is worn in hell; and as
she must know how to make it, let it never be out of her hands; for
when she is occupied in shifting the bobbins to and fro, the image or
images of what she loves will not shift to and fro in her thoughts;
this is the truth, this is my opinion, and this is my advice." "And
mine," added Sancho; "for I never in all my life saw a lace-maker that
died for love; when damsels are at work their minds are more set on
finishing their tasks than on thinking of their loves. I speak from my
own experience; for when I'm digging I never think of my old woman; I
mean my Teresa Panza, whom I love better than my own eyelids." "You
say well, Sancho," said the duchess, "and I will take care that my
Altisidora employs herself henceforward in needlework of some sort;
for she is extremely expert at it." "There is no occasion to have
recourse to that remedy, senora," said Altisidora; "for the mere
thought of the cruelty with which this vagabond villain has treated me
will suffice to blot him out of my memory without any other device;
with your highness's leave I will retire, not to have before my eyes,
I won't say his rueful countenance, but his abominable, ugly looks."
"That reminds me of the common saying, that 'he that rails is ready to
forgive,'" said the duke. Altisidora then, pretending to wipe away her
tears with a handkerchief, made an obeisance to her master and
mistress and quitted the room. "Ill luck betide thee, poor damsel,"
said Sancho, "ill luck betide thee! Thou hast fallen in with a soul as
dry as a rush and a heart as hard as oak; had it been me, i'faith
'another cock would have crowed to thee.'" So the conversation came to
an end, and Don Quixote retired to take his midday sleep; but the
duchess begged Sancho, unless he had a very great desire to go to
sleep, to come and spend the afternoon with her and her damsels in a
very cool chamber. Sancho replied that, though he certainly had the
habit of sleeping four or five hours in the heat of the day in summer,
to serve her excellence he would try with all his might not to sleep
even one that day, and that he would come in obedience to her command,
and with that he went off. The duke gave fresh orders with respect to
treating Don Quixote as a knight-errant, without departing even in
smallest particular from the style in which, as the stories tell us,
they used to treat the knights of old. CHAPTER XXXIII. OF THE
DELECTABLE DISCOURSE WHICH THE DUCHESS AND HER DAMSELS HELD WITH
SANCHO PANZA, WELL WORTH READING AND NOTING CHAPTER XXXIV WHICH
RELATES HOW THEY LEARNED THE WAY IN WHICH THEY WERE TO DISENCHANT THE
PEERLESS DULCINEA DEL TOBOSO, WHICH IS ONE OF THE RAREST ADVENTURES IN
THIS BOOK CHAPTER XXXV WHEREIN IS CONTINUED THE INSTRUCTION GIVEN TO
DON QUIXOTE TOUCHING THE DISENCHANTMENT OF DULCINEA, TOGETHER WITH
OTHER MARVELLOUS INCIDENTS They saw advancing towards them, to the
sound of this pleasing music, what they call a triumphal car, drawn by
six grey mules with white linen housings, on each of which was mounted
a penitent, robed also in white, with a large lighted wax taper in his
hand. The car was twice or, perhaps, three times as large as the
former ones, and in front and on the sides stood twelve more
penitents, all as white as snow and all with lighted tapers, a
spectacle to excite fear as well as wonder; and on a raised throne was
seated a nymph draped in a multitude of silver-tissue veils with an
embroidery of countless gold spangles glittering all over them, that
made her appear, if not richly, at least brilliantly, apparelled. She
had her face covered with thin transparent sendal, the texture of
which did not prevent the fair features of a maiden from being
distinguished, while the numerous lights made it possible to judge of
her beauty and of her years, which seemed to be not less than
seventeen but not to have yet reached twenty. Beside her was a figure
in a robe of state, as they call it, reaching to the feet, while the
head was covered with a black veil. But the instant the car was
opposite the duke and duchess and Don Quixote remained at table
discussing a great variety of things, but all bearing on the calling
of arms and knight-errantry. The duchess begged Don Quixote, as he
seemed to have a retentive memory, to describe and portray to her the
beauty and features of the lady Dulcinea del Toboso, for, judging by
what fame trumpeted abroad of her beauty, she felt sure she must be
the fairest creature in the world, nay, in all La Mancha. Don Quixote
sighed on hearing the duchess's request, and said, "If I could pluck
out my heart, and lay it on a plate on this table here before your
highness's eyes, it would spare my tongue the pain of telling what can
hardly be thought of, for in it your excellence would see her
portrayed in full. But why should I attempt to depict and describe in
detail, and feature by feature, the beauty of the peerless Dulcinea,
the burden being one worthy of other shoulders than mine, an
enterprise wherein the pencils of Parrhasius, Timantes, and Apelles,
and the graver of Lysippus ought to be employed, to paint it in
pictures and carve it in marble and bronze, and Ciceronian and
Demosthenian eloquence to sound its praises?" "What does Demosthenian
mean, Senor Don Quixote?" said the duchess; "it is a word I never
heard in all my life." "Demosthenian eloquence," said Don Quixote,
"means the eloquence of Demosthenes, as Ciceronian means that of
Cicero, who were the two most eloquent orators in the world." "True,"
said the duke; "you must have lost your wits to ask such a question.
Nevertheless, Senor Don Quixote would greatly gratify us if he would
depict her to us; for never fear, even in an outline or sketch she
will be something to make the fairest envious." "I would do so
certainly," said Don Quixote, "had she not been blurred to my mind's
eye by the misfortune that fell upon her a short time since, one of
such a nature that I am more ready to weep over it than to describe
it. For your highnesses must know that, going a few days back to kiss
her hands and receive her benediction, approbation, and permission for
this third sally, I found her altogether a different being from the
one I sought; I found her enchanted and changed from a princess into a
peasant, from fair to foul, from an angel into a devil, from fragrant
to pestiferous, from refined to clownish, from a dignified lady into a
jumping tomboy, and, in a word, from Dulcinea del Toboso into a coarse
Sayago wench." "God bless me!" said the duke aloud at this, "who can
have done the world such an injury? Who can have robbed it of the
beauty that gladdened it, of the grace and gaiety that charmed it, of
the modesty that shed a lustre upon it?" "Who?" replied Don Quixote;
"who could it be but some malignant enchanter of the many that
persecute me out of envy--that accursed race born into the world to
obscure and bring to naught the achievements of the good, and glorify
and exalt the deeds of the wicked? Enchanters have persecuted me,
enchanters persecute me still, and enchanters will continue to
persecute me until they have sunk me and my lofty chivalry in the deep
abyss of oblivion; and they injure and wound me where they know I feel
it most. For to deprive a knight-errant of his lady is to deprive him
of the eyes he sees with, of the sun that gives him light, of the food
whereby he lives. Many a time before have I said it, and I say it now
once more, a knight-errant without a lady is like a tree without
leaves, a building without a foundation, or a shadow without the body
that causes it." "There is no denying it," said the duchess; "but
still, if we are to believe the history of Don Quixote that has come
out here lately with general applause, it is to be inferred from it,
if I mistake not, that you never saw the lady Dulcinea, and that the
said lady is nothing in the world but an imaginary lady, one that you
yourself begot and gave birth to in your brain, and adorned with
whatever charms and perfections you chose." "There is a good deal to
be said on this matter of counties." To which Don Quixote returned, "I
know not what more there is to be said; I only guide myself by the
example set me by the great Amadis of Gaul, when he made his squire
count of the Insula Firme; and so, without any scruples of conscience,
I can make a count of Sancho Panza, for he is one of the best squires
that ever knight-errant had." The canon was astonished at the
methodical nonsense (if nonsense be capable of method) that Don
Quixote uttered, at the way in which he had described the adventure of
the knight of the lake, at the impression that the deliberate lies of
the books he read had made upon him, and lastly he marvelled at the
simplicity of Sancho, who desired so eagerly to obtain the county his
master had promised him. By this time the canon's servants, who had
gone to the inn to fetch the sumpter mule, had returned, and making a
carpet and the green grass of the meadow serve as a table, they seated
themselves in the shade of some trees and made their repast there,
that the carter might not be deprived of the advantage of the spot, as
has been already said. As they were eating they suddenly heard a loud
noise and the sound of a bell that seemed to come from among some
brambles and thick bushes that were close by, and the same instant
they observed a beautiful goat, spotted all over black, white, and
brown, spring out of the thicket with a goatherd after it, calling to
it and uttering the usual cries to make it stop or turn back to the
fold. The fugitive goat, scared and frightened, ran towards the
company as if seeking their protection and then stood still, and the
goatherd coming up seized it by the horns and began to talk to it as
if it were possessed of reason and understanding: "Ah wanderer,
wanderer, Spotty, Spotty; how have you gone limping all this time?
What wolves have frightened you, my daughter? Won't you tell me what
is the matter, my beauty? But what else can it be except that you are
a she, and cannot keep quiet? A plague on your humours and the humours
of those you take after! Come back, come back, my darling; and if you
will not be so happy, at any rate you will be safe in the fold or with
your companions; for if you who ought to keep and lead them, go
wandering astray, what will become of them?" The goatherd's talk
amused all who heard it, but especially the canon, who said to him,
"As you live, brother, take it easy, and be not in such a hurry to
drive this goat back to the fold; for, being a female, as you say, she
will follow her natural instinct in spite of all you can do to prevent
it. Take this morsel and drink a sup, and that will soothe your
irritation, and in the meantime the goat will rest herself," and so
saying, he handed him the loins of a cold rabbit on a fork. The
goatherd took it with thanks, and drank and calmed himself, and then
said, "I should be sorry if your worships were to take me for a
simpleton for having spoken so seriously as I did to this animal; but
the truth is there is a certain mystery in the words I used. I am a
clown, but not so much of one but that I know how to behave to men and
to beasts." "That I can well believe," said the curate, "for I know
already by experience that the woods breed men of learning, and
shepherds' harbour philosophers." "At all events, senor," returned the
goatherd, "they shelter men of experience; and that you may see the
truth of this and grasp it, though I may seem to put myself forward
without being asked, I will, if it will not tire you, gentlemen, and
you will give me your attention for a little, tell you a true story
which will confirm this gentleman's word (and he pointed to the
curate) as well as my own." To this Don Quixote replied, "Seeing that
this affair has a certain colour of chivalry about it, I for my part,
brother, will hear you most gladly, and so will all these gentlemen,
from the high intelligence they possess and their love of curious
novelties that interest, charm, and entertain the mind, as I feel
quite sure your story will do. So begin, friend, for we are all
prepared to listen." "I draw my stakes," said Sancho, "and will
retreat with this pasty to the brook there, where I mean to victual
myself for three days; for I have heard my lord, Don Quixote, say that
a knight-errant's squire should eat until he can hold no more,
whenever he has the chance, because it often happens them to get by
accident into a wood so thick that they cannot find a way out of it
for six days; and if the man is not well filled or his alforjas well
stored, there he may stay, as very often he does, turned into a dried
mummy." "Thou art in the right of it, Sancho," said Don Quixote; "go
where thou wilt and eat all thou canst, for I have had enough, and
only want to give my mind its refreshment, as I shall by listening to
this good fellow's story." "It is what we shall all do," said the
canon; and then begged the goatherd to begin the promised tale. The
goatherd gave the goat which he held by the horns a couple of slaps on
the back, saying, "Lie down here beside me, Spotty, for we have time
enough to return to our fold." The goat seemed to understand him, for
as her master seated himself, she stretched herself quietly beside him
and looked up in his face to show him she was all attention to what he
was going to say, and then in these words he began his story. CHAPTER
LI. WHICH DEALS WITH WHAT THE GOATHERD TOLD THOSE WHO WERE CARRYING
OFF DON QUIXOTE Three leagues from this valley there is a village
which, though small, is one of the richest in all this neighbourhood,
and in it there lived a farmer, a very worthy man, and so much
respected that, although to be so is the natural consequence of being
rich, he was even more respected for his virtue than for the wealth he
had acquired. But what made him still more fortunate, as he said
himself, was having a daughter of such exceeding beauty, rare
intelligence, gracefulness, and virtue, that everyone who knew her and
beheld her marvelled at the extraordinary gifts with which heaven and
nature had endowed her. As a child she was beautiful, she continued to
grow in beauty, and at the age of sixteen she was most lovely. The
fame of her beauty began to spread abroad through all the villages
around--but why do I say the villages around, merely, when it spread
to distant cities, and even made its way into the halls of royalty and
reached the ears of people of every class, who came from all sides to
see her as if to see something rare and curious, or some
wonder-working image? Her father watched over her and she watched over
herself; for there are no locks, or guards, or bolts that can protect
a young girl better than her own modesty. The wealth of the father and
the beauty of the daughter led many neighbours as well as strangers to
seek her for a wife; but he, as one might well be who had the disposal
of so rich a jewel, was perplexed and unable to make up his mind to
which of her countless suitors he should entrust her. I was one among
the many who felt a desire so natural, and, as her father knew who I
was, and I was of the same town, of pure blood, in the bloom of life,
and very rich in possessions, I had great hopes of success. There was
another of the same place and qualifications who also sought her, and
this made her father's choice hang in the balance, for he felt that on
either of us his daughter would be well bestowed; so to escape from
this state of perplexity he resolved to refer the matter to Leandra
(for that is the name of the rich damsel who has reduced me to
misery), reflecting that as we were both equal it would be best to
leave it to his dear daughter to choose according to her
inclination--a course that is worthy of imitation by all fathers who
wish to settle their children in life. I do not mean that they ought
to leave them to make a choice of what is contemptible and bad, but
that they should place before them what is good and then allow them to
make a good choice as they please. I do not know which Leandra chose;
I only know her father put us both off with the tender age of his
daughter and vague words that neither bound him nor dismissed us. My
rival is called Anselmo and I myself Eugenio--that you may know the
names of the personages that figure in this tragedy, the end of which
is still in suspense, though it is plain to see it must be disastrous.
About this time there arrived in our town one Vicente de la Roca, the
son of a poor peasant of the same town, the said Vicente having
returned from service as a soldier in Italy and divers other parts. A
captain who chanced to pass that way with his company had carried him
off from our village when he was a boy of about twelve years, and now
twelve years later the young man came back in a soldier's uniform,
arrayed in a thousand colours, and all over glass trinkets and fine
steel chains. To-day he would appear in one gay dress, to-morrow in
another; but all flimsy and gaudy, of little substance and less worth.
The peasant folk, who are naturally malicious, and when they have
nothing to do can be malice itself, remarked all this, and took note
of his finery and jewellery, piece by piece, and discovered that he
had three suits of different colours, with garters and stockings to
match; but he made so many arrangements and combinations out of them,
that if they had not counted them, anyone would have sworn that he had
made a display of more than ten suits of clothes and twenty plumes. Do
not look upon all this that I am telling you about the clothes as
uncalled for or spun out, for they have a great deal to do with the
story. He used to seat himself on a bench under the great poplar in
our plaza, and there he would keep us all hanging open-mouthed on the
stories he told us of his exploits. There was no country on the face
of the globe he had not seen, nor battle he had not been engaged in;
he had killed more Moors than there are in Morocco and Tunis, and
fought more single combats, according to his own account, than
Garcilaso, Diego Garcia de Paredes and a thousand others he named, and
out of all he had come victorious without losing a drop of blood. On
the other hand he showed marks of wounds, which, though they could not
be made out, he said were gunshot wounds received in divers encounters
and actions. Lastly, with monstrous impudence he used to say "you" to
his equals and even those who knew what he was, and declare that his
arm was his father and his deeds his pedigree, and that being a
soldier he was as good as the king himself. And to add to these
swaggering ways he was a trifle of a musician, and played the guitar
with such a flourish that some said he made it speak; nor did his
accomplishments end here, for he was something of a poet too, and on
every trifle that happened in the town he made a ballad a league long.
This soldier, then, that I have described, this Vicente de la Roca,
this bravo, gallant, musician, poet, was often seen and watched by
Leandra from a window of her house which looked out on the plaza. The
glitter of his showy attire took her fancy, his ballads bewitched her
(for he gave away twenty copies of every one he made), the tales of
his exploits which he told about himself came to her ears; and in
short, as the devil no doubt had arranged it, she fell in love with
him before the presumption of making love to her had suggested itself
to him; and as in love-affairs none are more easily brought to an
issue than those which have the inclination of the lady for an ally,
Leandra and Vicente came to an understanding without any difficulty;
and before any of her numerous suitors had any suspicion of her
design, she had already carried it into effect, having left the house
of her dearly beloved father (for mother she had none), and
disappeared from the village with the soldier, who came more
triumphantly out of this enterprise than out of any of the large
number he laid claim to. All the village and all who heard of it were
amazed at the affair; I was aghast, Anselmo thunderstruck, her father
full of grief, her relations indignant, the authorities all in a
ferment, the officers of the Brotherhood in arms. They scoured the
roads, they searched the woods and all quarters, and at the end of
three days they found the flighty Leandra in a mountain cave, stript
to her shift, and robbed of all the money and precious jewels she had
carried away from home with her. They brought her back to her unhappy
father, and questioned her as to her misfortune, and she confessed
without pressure that Vicente de la Roca had deceived her, and under
promise of marrying her had induced her to leave her father's house,
as he meant to take her to the richest and most delightful city in the
whole world, which was Naples; and that she, ill-advised and deluded,
had believed him, and robbed her father, and handed over all to him
the night she disappeared; and that he had carried her away to a
rugged mountain and shut her up in the eave where they had found her.
She said, moreover, that the soldier, without robbing her of her
honour, had taken from her everything she had, and made off, leaving
her in the cave, a thing that still further surprised everybody. It
was not easy for us to credit the young man's continence, but she
asserted it with such earnestness that it helped to console her
distressed father, who thought nothing of what had been taken since
the jewel that once lost can never be recovered had been left to his
daughter. The same day that Leandra made her appearance her father
removed her from our sight and took her away to shut her up in a
convent in a town near this, in the hope that time may wear away some
of the disgrace she has incurred. Leandra's youth furnished an excuse
for her fault, at least with those to whom it was of no consequence
whether she was good or bad; but those who knew her shrewdness and
intelligence did not attribute her misdemeanour to ignorance but to
wantonness and the natural disposition of women, which is for the most
part flighty and ill-regulated. Leandra withdrawn from sight,
Anselmo's eyes grew blind, or at any rate found nothing to look at
that gave them any pleasure, and mine were in darkness without a ray
of light to direct them to anything enjoyable while Leandra was away.
Our melancholy grew greater, our patience grew less; we cursed the
soldier's finery and railed at the carelessness of Leandra's father.
At last Anselmo and I agreed to leave the village and come to this
valley; and, he feeding a great flock of sheep of his own, and I a
large herd of goats of mine, we pass our life among the trees, giving
vent to our sorrows, together singing the fair Leandra's praises, or
upbraiding her, or else sighing alone, and to heaven pouring forth our
complaints in solitude. Following our example, many more of Leandra's
lovers have come to these rude mountains and adopted our mode of life,
and they are so numerous that one would fancy the place had been
turned into the pastoral Arcadia, so full is it of shepherds and
sheep-folds; nor is there a spot in it where the name of the fair
Leandra is not heard. Here one curses her and calls her capricious,
fickle, and immodest, there another condemns her as frail and
frivolous; this pardons and absolves her, that spurns and reviles her;
one extols her beauty, another assails her character, and in short all
abuse her, and all adore her, and to such a pitch has this general
infatuation gone that there are some who complain of her scorn without
ever having exchanged a word with her, and even some that bewail and
mourn the raging fever of jealousy, for which she never gave anyone
cause, for, as I have already said, her misconduct was known before
her passion. There is no nook among the rocks, no brookside, no shade
beneath the trees that is not haunted by some shepherd telling his
woes to the breezes; wherever there is an echo it repeats the name of
Leandra; the mountains ring with "Leandra," "Leandra" murmur the
brooks, and Leandra keeps us all bewildered and bewitched, hoping
without hope and fearing without knowing what we fear. Of all this
silly set the one that shows the least and also the most sense is my
rival Anselmo, for having so many other things to complain of, he only
complains of separation, and to the accompaniment of a rebeck, which
he plays admirably, he sings his complaints in verses that show his
ingenuity. I follow another, easier, and to my mind wiser course, and
that is to rail at the frivolity of women, at their inconstancy, their
double dealing, their broken promises, their unkept pledges, and in
short the want of reflection they show in fixing their affections and
inclinations. This, sirs, was the reason of words and expressions I
made use of to this goat when I came up just now; for as she is a
female I have a contempt for her, though she is the best in all my
fold. This is the story I promised to tell you, and if I have been
tedious in telling it, I will not be slow to serve you; my hut is
close by, and I have fresh milk and dainty cheese there, as well as a
variety of toothsome fruit, no less pleasing to the eye than to the
palate. CHAPTER LII. OF THE QUARREL THAT DON QUIXOTE HAD WITH THE
GOATHERD, TOGETHER WITH THE RARE ADVENTURE OF THE PENITENTS, WHICH
WITH AN EXPENDITURE OF SWEAT HE BROUGHT TO A HAPPY CONCLUSION The
goatherd's tale gave great satisfaction to all the hearers, and the
canon especially enjoyed it, for he had remarked with particular
attention the manner in which it had been told, which was as unlike
the manner of a clownish goatherd as it was like that of a polished
city wit; and he observed that the curate had been quite right in
saying that the woods bred men of learning. They all offered their
services to Eugenio but he who showed himself most liberal in this way
was Don Quixote, who said to him, "Most assuredly, brother goatherd,
if I found myself in a position to attempt any adventure, I would,
this very instant, set out on your behalf, and would rescue Leandra
from that convent (where no doubt she is kept against her will), in
spite of the abbess and all who might try to prevent me, and would
place her in your hands to deal with her according to your will and
pleasure, observing, however, the laws of chivalry which lay down that
no violence of any kind is to be offered to any damsel. But I trust in
God our Lord that the might of one malignant enchanter may not prove
so great but that the power of another better disposed may prove
superior to it, and then I promise you my support and assistance, as I
am bound to do by my profession, which is none other than to give aid
to the weak and needy." The goatherd eyed him, and noticing Don
Quixote's sorry appearance and looks, he was filled with wonder, and
asked the barber, who was next him, "Senor, who is this man who makes
such a figure and talks in such a strain?" "Who should it be," said
the barber, "but the famous Don Quixote of La Mancha, otherwise called
'The Knight of the Rueful Countenance;' for though self-praise is
degrading, I must perforce sound my own sometimes, that is to say,
when there is no one at hand to do it for me. So that, gentle sir,
neither this horse, nor this lance, nor this shield, nor this squire,
nor all these arms put together, nor the sallowness of my countenance,
nor my gaunt leanness, will henceforth astonish you, now that you know
who I am and what profession I follow." With these words Don Quixote
held his peace, and, from the time he took to answer, the man in green
seemed to be at a loss for a reply; after a long pause, however, he
said to him, "You were right when you saw curiosity in my amazement,
sir knight; but you have not succeeded in removing the astonishment I
feel at seeing you; for although you say, senor, that knowing who you
are ought to remove it, it has not done so; on the contrary, now that
I know, I am left more amazed and astonished than before. What! is it
possible that there are knights-errant in the world in these days, and
histories of real chivalry printed? I cannot realise the fact that
there can be anyone on earth now-a-days who aids widows, or protects
maidens, or defends wives, or succours orphans; nor should I believe
it had I not seen it in your worship with my own eyes. Blessed be
heaven! for by means of this history of your noble and genuine
chivalrous deeds, which you say has been printed, the countless
stories of fictitious knights-errant with which the world is filled,
so much to the injury of morality and the prejudice and discredit of
good histories, will have been driven into oblivion." "There is a good
deal to be said on that point," said Sancho; "let us both go to sleep
now, and after that, God has decreed what will happen. Let me tell
your worship that for a man to whip himself in cold blood is a hard
thing, especially if the stripes fall upon an ill-nourished and
worse-fed body. Let my lady Dulcinea have patience, and when she is
least expecting it, she will see me made a riddle of with whipping,
and 'until death it's all life;' I mean that I have still life in me,
and the desire to make good what I have promised." Don Quixote thanked
him, and ate a little, and Sancho a good deal, and then they both lay
down to sleep, leaving those two inseparable friends and comrades,
Rocinante and Dapple, to their own devices and to feed unrestrained
upon the abundant grass with which the meadow was furnished. They woke
up rather late, mounted once more and resumed their journey, pushing
on to reach an inn which was in sight, apparently a league off. I say
an inn, because Don Quixote called it so, contrary to his usual
practice of calling all inns castles. They reached it, and asked the
landlord if they could put up there. He said yes, with as much comfort
and as good fare as they could find in Saragossa. They dismounted, and
Sancho stowed away his larder in a room of which the landlord gave him
the key. He took the beasts to the stable, fed them, and came back to
see what orders Don Quixote, who was seated on a bench at the door,
had for him, giving special thanks to heaven that this inn had not
been taken for a castle by his master. Supper-time came, and they
repaired to their room, and Sancho asked the landlord what he had to
give them for supper. To this the landlord replied that his mouth
should be the measure; he had only to ask what he would; for that inn
was provided with the birds of the air and the fowls of the earth and
the fish of the sea. "There's no need of all that," said Sancho; "if
they'll roast us a couple of chickens we'll be satisfied, for my
master is delicate and eats little, and I'm not over and above
gluttonous." The landlord replied he had no chickens, for the kites
had stolen them. "Well then," said Sancho, "let senor landlord tell
them to roast a pullet, so that it is a tender one." "Pullet! My
father!" said the landlord; "indeed and in truth it's only yesterday I
sent over fifty to the city to sell; but saving pullets ask what you
will." "In that case," said Sancho, "you will not be without veal or
kid." "Just now," said the landlord, "there's none in the house, for
it's all finished; but next week there will be enough and to spare."
"Much good that does us," said Sancho; "I'll lay a bet that all these
short-comings are going to wind up in plenty of bacon and eggs." "By
God," said the landlord, "my guest's wits must be precious dull; I
tell him I have neither pullets nor hens, and he wants me to have
eggs! Talk of other dainties, if you please, and don't ask for hens
again." "Body o' me!" said Sancho, "let's settle the matter; say at
once what you have got, and let us have no more words about it." "In
truth and earnest, senor guest," said the landlord, "all I have is a
couple of cow-heels like calves' feet, or a couple of calves' feet
like cowheels; they are boiled with chick-peas, onions, and bacon, and
at this moment they are crying 'Come eat me, come eat me." "I mark
them for mine on the spot," said Sancho; "let nobody touch them; I'll
pay better for them than anyone else, for I could not wish for
anything more to my taste; and I don't care a pin whether they are
feet or heels." "Nobody shall touch them," said the landlord; "for the
other guests I have, being persons of high quality, bring their own
cook and caterer and larder with them." "If you come to people of
quality," said Sancho, "there's nobody more so than my master; but the
calling he follows does not allow of larders or store-rooms; we lay
ourselves down in the middle of a meadow, and fill ourselves with
acorns or medlars." Here ended Sancho's conversation with the
landlord, Sancho not caring to carry it any farther by answering him;
for he had already asked him what calling or what profession it was
his master was of. Supper-time having come, then, Don Quixote betook
himself to his room, the landlord brought in the stew-pan just as it
was, and he sat himself down to sup very resolutely. It seems that in
another room, which was next to Don Quixote's, with nothing but a thin
partition to separate it, he overheard these words, "As you live,
Senor Don Jeronimo, while they are bringing supper, let us read
another chapter of the Second Part of 'Don Quixote of La Mancha.'" The
instant Don Quixote heard his own name be started to his feet and
listened with open ears to catch what they said about him, and heard
the Don Jeronimo who had been addressed say in reply, "Why would you
have us read that absurd stuff, Don Juan, when it is impossible for
anyone who has read the First Part of the history of 'Don Quixote of
La Mancha' to take any pleasure in reading this Second Part?" "For all
that," said he who was addressed as Don Juan, "we shall do well to
read it, for there is no book so bad but it has something good in it,"
said the bachelor. "No doubt of that," replied Don Quixote; "but it
often happens that those who have acquired and attained a
well-deserved reputation by their writings, lose it entirely, or
damage it in some degree, when they give them to the press." "The
reason of that," said Samson, "is, that as printed works are examined
leisurely, their faults are easily seen; and the greater the fame of
the writer, the more closely are they scrutinised. Men famous for
their genius, great poets, illustrious historians, are always, or most
commonly, envied by those who take a particular delight and pleasure
in criticising the writings of others, without having produced any of
their own." "That is no wonder," said Don Quixote; "for there are many
divines who are no good for the pulpit, but excellent in detecting the
defects or excesses of those who preach." "All that is true, Senor Don
Quixote," said Carrasco; "but I wish such fault-finders were more
lenient and less exacting, and did not pay so much attention to the
spots on the bright sun of the work they grumble at; for if aliquando
bonus dormitat Homerus, they should remember how long he remained
awake to shed the light of his work with as little shade as possible;
and perhaps it may be that what they find fault with may be moles,
that sometimes heighten the beauty of the face that bears them; and so
I say very great is the risk to which he who prints a book exposes
himself, for of all impossibilities the greatest is to write one that
will satisfy and please all readers." "That which treats of me must
have pleased few," said Don Quixote. "Quite the contrary," said the
bachelor; "for, as stultorum infinitum est numerus, innumerable are
those who have relished the said history; but some have brought a
charge against the author's memory, inasmuch as he forgot to say who
the thief was who stole Sancho's Dapple; for it is not stated there,
but only to be inferred from what is set down, that he was stolen, and
a little farther on we see Sancho mounted on the same ass, without any
reappearance of it. They say, too, that he forgot to state what Sancho
did with those hundred crowns that he found in the valise in the
Sierra Morena, as he never alludes to them again, and there are many
who would be glad to know what he did with them, or what he spent them
on, for it is one of the serious omissions of the work." "Senor
Samson, I am not in a humour now for going into accounts or
explanations," said Sancho; "for there's a sinking of the stomach come
over me, and unless I doctor it with a couple of sups of the old stuff
it will put me on the thorn of Santa Lucia. I have it at home, and my
old woman is waiting for me; after dinner I'll come back, and will
answer you and all the world every question you may choose to ask, as
well about the loss of the ass as about the spending of the hundred
crowns;" and without another word or waiting for a reply he made off
home. Don Quixote begged and entreated the bachelor to stay and do
penance with him. The bachelor accepted the invitation and remained, a
couple of young pigeons were added to the ordinary fare, at dinner
they talked chivalry, Carrasco fell in with his host's humour, the
banquet came to an end, they took their afternoon sleep, Sancho
returned, and their conversation was resumed. CHAPTER IV. IN WHICH
SANCHO PANZA GIVES A SATISFACTORY REPLY TO THE DOUBTS AND QUESTIONS OF
THE BACHELOR SAMSON CARRASCO, TOGETHER WITH OTHER MATTERS WORTH
KNOWING AND TELLING Sancho came back to Don Quixote's house, and
returning to the late subject of conversation, he said, "As to what
Senor Samson said, that he would like to know by whom, or how, or when
my ass was stolen, I say in reply that the same night we went into the
Sierra Morena, flying from the Holy Brotherhood after that unlucky
adventure of the galley slaves, and the other of the corpse that was
going to Segovia, my master and I ensconced ourselves in a thicket,
and there, my master leaning on his lance, and I seated on my Dapple,
battered and weary with the late frays we fell asleep as if it had
been on four feather mattresses; and I in particular slept so sound,
that, whoever he was, he was able to come and prop me up on four
stakes, which he put under the four corners of the pack-saddle in such
a way that he left me mounted on it, and took away Dapple from under
me without my feeling it." "That is an easy matter," said Don Quixote,
"and it is no new occurrence, for the same thing happened to
Sacripante at the siege of Albracca; the famous thief, Brunello, by
the same contrivance, took his horse from between his legs." "Day
came," continued Sancho, "and the moment I stirred the stakes gave way
and I fell to the ground with a mighty come down; I looked about for
the ass, but could not see him; the tears rushed to my eyes and I
raised such a lamentation that, if the author of our history has not
put it in, he may depend upon it he has left out a good thing. Some
days after, I know not how many, travelling with her ladyship the
Princess Micomicona, I saw my ass, and mounted upon him, in the dress
of a gipsy, was that Gines de Pasamonte, the great rogue and rascal
that my master and I freed from the chain." "That is not where the
mistake is," replied Samson; "it is, that before the ass has turned
up, the author speaks of Sancho as being mounted on it." "I don't know
what to say to that," replied Sancho; "all I know is that the tokens
he gave me about my own house, wife and children, nobody else but
himself could have given me; and the face, once the nose was off, was
the very face of Tom Cecial, as I have seen it many a time in my town
and next door to my own house; and the sound of the voice was just the
same." "Let us reason the matter, Sancho," said Don Quixote. "Come
now, by what process of thinking can it be supposed that the bachelor
Samson Carrasco would come as a knight-errant, in arms offensive and
defensive, to fight with me? Have I ever been by any chance his enemy?
Have I ever given him any occasion to owe me a grudge? Am I his rival,
or does he profess arms, that he should envy the fame I have acquired
in them?" "Well, but what are we to say, senor," returned Sancho,
"about that knight, whoever he is, being so like the bachelor
Carrasco, and his squire so like my gossip, Tom Cecial? And if that be
enchantment, as your worship says, was there no other pair in the
world for them to take the likeness of?" "It is all," said Don
Quixote, "a scheme and plot of the malignant magicians that persecute
me, who, foreseeing that I was to be victorious in the conflict,
arranged that the vanquished knight should display the countenance of
my friend the bachelor, in order that the friendship I bear him should
interpose to stay the edge of my sword and might of my arm, and temper
the just wrath of my heart; so that he who sought to take my life by
fraud and falsehood should save his own. And to prove it, thou knowest
already, Sancho, by experience which cannot lie or deceive, how easy
it is for enchanters to change one countenance into another, turning
fair into foul, and foul into fair; for it is not two days since thou
sawest with thine own eyes the beauty and elegance of the peerless
Dulcinea in all its perfection and natural harmony, while I saw her in
the repulsive and mean form of a coarse country wench, with cataracts
in her eyes and a foul smell in her mouth; and when the perverse
enchanter ventured to effect so wicked a transformation, it is no
wonder if he effected that of Samson Carrasco and thy gossip in order
to snatch the glory of victory out of my grasp. For all that, however,
I console myself, because, after all, in whatever shape he may have
been, I have victorious over my enemy." "God knows what's the truth of
it all," said Sancho; and knowing as he did that the transformation of
Dulcinea had been a device and imposition of his own, his master's
illusions were not satisfactory to him; but he did not like to reply
lest he should say something that might disclose his trickery. As they
were engaged in this conversation they were overtaken by a man who was
following the same road behind them, mounted on a very handsome
flea-bitten mare, and dressed in a gaban of fine green cloth, with
tawny velvet facings, and a montera of the same velvet. The trappings
of the mare were of the field and jineta fashion, and of mulberry
colour and green. He carried a Moorish cutlass hanging from a broad
green and gold baldric; the buskins were of the same make as the
baldric; the spurs were not gilt, but lacquered green, and so brightly
polished that, matching as they did the rest of his apparel, they
looked better than if they had been of pure gold. When the traveller
came up with them he saluted them courteously, and spurring his mare
was passing them without stopping, but Don Quixote called out to him,
"Gallant sir, if so be your worship is going our road, and has no
occasion for speed, it would be a pleasure to me if we were to join
company." "In truth," replied he on the mare, "I would not pass you so
hastily but for fear that horse might turn restive in the company of
my mare." "You may safely hold in your mare, senor," said Sancho in
reply to this, "for our horse is the most virtuous and well-behaved
horse in the world; he never does anything wrong on such occasions,
and the only time he misbehaved, my master and I suffered for it
sevenfold; I say again your worship may pull up if you like; for if
she was offered to him between two plates the horse would not hanker
after her." The traveller drew rein, amazed at the trim and features
of Don Quixote, who rode without his helmet, which Sancho carried like
a valise in front of Dapple's pack-saddle; and if the man in green
examined Don Quixote closely, still more closely did Don Quixote
examine the man in green, who struck him as being a man of
intelligence. In appearance he was about fifty years of age, with but
few grey hairs, an aquiline cast of features, and an expression
between grave and gay; and his dress and accoutrements showed him to
be a man of good condition. What he in green thought of Don Quixote of
La Mancha was that a man of that sort and shape he had never yet seen;
he marvelled at the length of his hair, his lofty stature, the
lankness and sallowness of his countenance, his armour, his bearing
and his gravity--a figure and picture such as had not been seen in
those regions for many a long day. Don Quixote saw very plainly the
attention with which the traveller was regarding him, and read his
curiosity in his astonishment; and courteous as he was and ready to
please everybody, before the other could ask him any question he
anticipated him by saying, "The appearance I present to your worship
being so strange and so out of the common, I should not be surprised
if it filled you with wonder; but you will cease to wonder when I tell
you, as I do, that I am one of those knights who, as people say, go
seeking adventures. I have left my home, I have mortgaged my estate, I
have given up my comforts, and committed myself to the arms of
Fortune, to bear me whithersoever she may please. My desire was to
bring to life again knight-errantry, now dead, and for some time past,
stumbling here, falling there, now coming down headlong, now raising
myself up again, I have carried out a great portion of my design,
succouring widows, protecting maidens, and giving aid to wives,
orphans, and minors, the proper and natural duty of knights-errant;
and, therefore, because of my many valiant and Christian achievements,
I have been already found worthy to make my way in print to well-nigh
all, or most, of the nations of the earth. Thirty thousand volumes of
my history have been printed, and it is on the high-road to be printed
thirty thousand thousands of times, if heaven does not put a stop to
it. In short, to sum up all in a few words, or in a single one, I may
tell you I am Don Quixote of La Mancha, otherwise called the Knight of
the Lions, for whom, by the disposition of heaven above, it is
reserved to give a happy issue to this adventure;" and so saying he
drew his sword and began making passes in the air at the millers, who,
hearing but not understanding all this nonsense, strove to stop the
boat, which was now getting into the rushing channel of the wheels.
Sancho fell upon his knees devoutly appealing to heaven to deliver him
from such imminent peril; which it did by the activity and quickness
of the millers, who, pushing against the boat with their poles,
stopped it, not, however, without upsetting and throwing Don Quixote
and Sancho into the water; and lucky it was for Don Quixote that he
could swim like a goose, though the weight of his armour carried him
twice to the bottom; and had it not been for the extraordinary fancies
of Don Quixote, and his conviction that the bachelor was not the
bachelor, senor bachelor would have been incapacitated for ever from
taking his degree of licentiate, all through not finding nests where
he thought to find birds. Tom Cecial, seeing how ill they had
succeeded, and what a sorry end their expedition had come to, said to
the bachelor, "Sure enough, Senor Samson Carrasco, we are served
right; it is easy enough to plan and set about an enterprise, but it
is often a difficult matter to come well out of it. Don Quixote a
madman, and we sane; he goes off laughing, safe, and sound, and you
are left sore and sorry! I'd like to know now which is the madder, he
who is so because he cannot help it, or he who is so of his own
choice?" To which Samson replied, "The difference between the two
sorts of madmen is, that he who is so will he nil he, will be one
always, while he who is so of his own choice?" To which Samson
replied, "The difference between the two sorts of madmen is, that he
who is so will he nil he, will be one always, while he who is so of
his own choice?" To which Samson replied, "The difference between the
two sorts of madmen is, that he who is so will he nil he, will be one
always, while he who is so of his own choice?" To which Samson
replied, "The difference between the two sorts of madmen is, that he
who is so will he nil he, will be one always, while he who is so of
his own accord can leave off being one whenever he likes." "In that
case," said Tom Cecial, "I was a madman of my own accord when I
volunteered to become your squire, and, of my own accord, I'll leave
off being one and go home." "That's your affair," returned Samson,
"but to suppose that I am going home until I have given Don Quixote a
thrashing is absurd; and it is not any wish that he may recover his
senses that will make me hunt him out now, but a wish for the sore
pain I am in with my ribs won't let me entertain more charitable
thoughts." Thus discoursing, the pair proceeded until they reached a
town where it was their good luck to find a bone-setter, with whose
help the unfortunate Samson was cured. Tom Cecial left him and went
home, while he stayed behind meditating vengeance; and the history
will return to him again at the proper time, so as not to omit making
merry with Don Quixote now. CHAPTER XVI. OF WHAT BEFELL DON QUIXOTE
WITH A DISCREET GENTLEMAN OF LA MANCHA Don Quixote pursued his journey
in the high spirits, satisfaction, and self-complacency already
described, fancying himself the most valorous knight-errant of the age
in the world because of his late victory. All the adventures that
could befall him from that time forth he regarded as already done and
brought to a happy issue; he made light of enchantments and
enchanters; he thought no more of the countless drubbings that had
been administered to him in the course of his knight-errantry, nor of
the volley of stones that had levelled half his teeth, nor of the
ingratitude of the galley slaves, nor of the audacity of the
Yanguesans and the shower of stakes that fell upon him; in short, he
said to himself that could he discover any means, mode, or way of
disenchanting his lady Dulcinea, he would not envy the highest fortune
that the most fortunate knight-errant of yore ever reached or could
reach. He was going along entirely absorbed in these fancies, when
Sancho said to him, "Isn't it odd, senor, that I have still before my
eyes that monstrous enormous nose of my gossip, Tom Cecial?" "And dost
thou, then, believe, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "that the Knight of
the Mirrors was the bachelor Carrasco, and his squire Tom Cecial thy
gossip?" "I don't know what to say to that," said Sancho, "unless that
the historian made a mistake, or perhaps it might be a blunder of the
printer's." "No doubt that's it," said Samson; "but what became of the
hundred crowns? Did they vanish?" To which Sancho answered, "I spent
them for my own good, and my wife's, and my children's, and it is they
that have made my wife bear so patiently all my wanderings on highways
and byways, in the service of my master, Don Quixote; for if after all
this time I had come back to the house without a rap and without the
ass, it would have been a poor look-out for me; and if anyone wants to
know anything more about me, here I am, ready to answer the king
himself in person; and it is no affair of anyone's whether I took or
did not take, whether I spent or did not spend; for the whacks that
were given me in these journeys were to be paid for in money, even if
they were valued at no more than four maravedis apiece, another
hundred crowns would not pay me for half of them. Let each look to
himself and not try to make out white black, and black white; for each
of us is as God made him, aye, and often worse." "I will take care,"
said Carrasco, "to impress upon the author of the history that, if he
prints it again, he must not forget what worthy Sancho has said, for
it will raise it a good span higher." "Is there anything else to
correct in the history, senor bachelor?" asked Don Quixote. "No doubt
there is," replied he; "but not anything that will be of the same
importance as those I have mentioned." "Does the author promise a
second part at all?" said Don Quixote. "He does promise one," replied
Samson; "but he says he has not found it, nor does he know who has got
it; and we cannot say whether it will appear or not; and so, on that
head, as some say that no second part has ever been good, and others
that enough has been already written about Don Quixote, it is thought
there will be no second part; though some, who are jovial rather than
saturnine, say, 'Let us have more Quixotades, let Don Quixote charge
and Sancho chatter, and no matter what it may turn out, we shall be
satisfied with that.'" "And what does the author mean to do?" said Don
Quixote. "What?" replied Samson; "why, as soon as he has found the
history which he is now searching for with extraordinary diligence, he
will at once give it to the press, moved more by the profit that may
accrue to him from doing so than by any thought of praise." Whereat
Sancho observed, "The author looks for money and profit, does he? It
will be a wonder if he succeeds, for it will be only hurry, hurry,
with him, like the tailor on Easter Eve; and works done in a hurry are
never finished as perfectly as they ought to be. Let master Moor, or
whatever he is, pay attention to what he is doing, and I and my master
will give him as much grouting ready to his hand, in the way of
adventures and accidents of all sorts, as would make up not only one
second part, but a hundred. The good man fancies, no doubt, that we
are fast asleep in the straw here, but let him hold up our feet to be
shod and he will see which foot it is we go lame on. All I say is,
that if my master would take my advice, we would be now afield,
redressing outrages and righting wrongs, as is the use and custom of
good knights-errant." Sancho had hardly uttered these words when two
gentlemen, for such they seemed to be, entered the room, and one of
them, throwing his arms round Don Quixote's neck, said to him, "Your
appearance cannot leave any question as to your name, nor can your
name fail to identify your appearance; unquestionably, senor, you are
the real Don Quixote of La Mancha, the famous, the valiant, the wise,
the lover, the righter of wrongs, the guardian of minors and orphans,
the protector of widows, the killer of damsels, he who has for his
sole mistress the peerless Dulcinea del Toboso, is this gentleman
before you, my master; all other Don Quixotes and all other Sancho
Panzas are dreams and mockeries." "By God I believe it," said Don
Alvaro; "for you have uttered more drolleries, my friend, in the few
words you have spoken than the other Sancho Panza in all I ever heard
from him, and they were not a few. He was more greedy than
well-spoken, and more dull than droll; and I am convinced that the
enchanters who persecute Don Quixote the Good have been trying to
persecute me with Don Quixote the Bad. But I don't know what to say,
for I am ready to swear I left him shut up in the Casa del Nuncio at
Toledo, and here another Don Quixote turns up, though a very different
one from mine." "I don't know whether I am good," said Don Quixote,
"but I can safely say I am not 'the Bad;' and to prove it, let me tell
you, Senor Don Alvaro Tarfe, I have never in my life been in
Saragossa; so far from that, when it was told me that this imaginary
Don Quixote had been present at the jousts in that city, I declined to
enter it, in order to drag his falsehood before the face of the world;
and so I went on straight to Barcelona, the treasure-house of
courtesy, haven of strangers, asylum of the poor, home of the valiant,
champion of the wronged, pleasant exchange of firm friendships, and
city unrivalled in site and beauty. And though the adventures that
befell me there are not by any means matters of enjoyment, but rather
of regret, I do not regret them, simply because I have seen it. In a
word, Senor Don Alvaro Tarfe, I am Don Quixote of La Mancha, he who
hath filled the whole world with his achievements." Roque Guinart at
once perceived that Don Quixote's weakness was more akin to madness
than to swagger; and though he had sometimes heard him spoken of, he
never regarded the things attributed to him as true, nor could he
persuade himself that such a humour could become dominant in the heart
of man; he was extremely glad, therefore, to meet him and test at
close quarters what he had heard of him at a distance; so he said to
him, "Despair not, valiant knight, nor regard as an untoward fate the
position in which thou findest thyself; it may be that by these slips
thy crooked fortune will make itself straight; for heaven by strange
circuitous ways, mysterious and incomprehensible to man, raises up the
fallen and makes rich the poor." Don Quixote was about to thank him,
when they heard behind them a noise as of a troop of horses; there
was, however, but one, riding on which at a furious pace came a youth,
apparently about twenty years of age, clad in green damask edged with
gold and breeches and a loose frock, with a hat looped up in the
Walloon fashion, tight-fitting polished boots, gilt spurs, dagger and
sword, and in his hand a musketoon, and a pair of pistols at his
waist. Roque turned round at the noise and perceived this comely
figure, which drawing near thus addressed him, "I came in quest of
thee, valiant Roque, to find in thee if not a remedy at least relief
in my misfortune; and not to keep thee in suspense, for I see thou
dost not recognise me, I will tell thee who I am; I am Claudia
Jeronima, the daughter of Simon Forte, thy good friend, and special
enemy of Clauquel Torrellas, who is thine also as being of the faction
opposed to thee. Thou knowest that this Torrellas has a son who is
called, or at least was not two hours since, Don Vicente Torrellas.
Well, to cut short the tale of my misfortune, I will tell thee in a
few words what this youth has brought upon me. He saw me, he paid
court to me, I listened to him, and, unknown to my father, I loved
him; for there is no woman, however secluded she may live or close she
may be kept, who will not have opportunities and to spare for
following her headlong impulses. In a word, he pledged himself to be
mine, and I promised to be his, without carrying matters any further.
Yesterday I learned that, forgetful of his pledge to me, he was about
to marry another, and that he was to go this morning to plight his
troth, intelligence which overwhelmed and exasperated me; my father
not being at home I was able to adopt this costume you see, and urging
my horse to speed I overtook Don Vicente about a league from this, and
without waiting to utter reproaches or hear excuses I fired this
musket at him, and these two pistols besides, and to the best of my
belief I must have lodged more than two bullets in his body, opening
doors to let my honour go free, enveloped in his blood. I left him
there in the hands of his servants, who did not dare and were not able
to interfere in his defence, and I come to seek from thee a
safe-conduct into France, where I have relatives with whom I can live;
and also to implore thee to protect my father, so that Don Vicente's
numerous kinsmen may not venture to wreak their lawless vengeance upon
him." Roque, filled with admiration at the gallant bearing, high
spirit, comely figure, and adventure of the fair Claudia, said to her,
"Come, senora, let us go and see if thy enemy is dead; and then we
will consider what will be best for thee." Don Quixote, who had been
listening to what Claudia said and Roque Guinart said in reply to her,
exclaimed, "Nobody need trouble himself with the defence of this lady,
for I take it upon myself. Give me my horse and arms, and wait for me
here; I will go in quest of this knight, and dead or alive I will make
him keep his word plighted to so great beauty." "Nobody need have any
doubt about that," said Sancho, "for my master has a very happy knack
of matchmaking; it's not many days since he forced another man to
marry, who in the same way backed out of his promise to another
maiden; and if it had not been for his persecutors the enchanters
changing the man's proper shape into a lacquey's the said maiden would
not be one this minute." Roque, who was paying more attention to the
fair Claudia's adventure than to the words of master or man, did not
hear them; and ordering his squires to restore to Sancho everything
they had stripped Dapple of, he directed them to return to the place
where they had been quartered during the night, and then set off with
Claudia at full speed in search of the wounded or slain Don Vicente.
They reached the spot where Claudia met him, but found nothing there
save freshly spilt blood; looking all round, however, they descried
some people on the slope of a hill above them, and concluded, as
indeed it proved to be, that it was Don Vicente, whom either dead or
alive his servants were removing to attend to his wounds or to bury
him. They made haste to overtake them, which, as the party moved
slowly, they were able to do with ease. They found Don Vicente in the
arms of his servants, whom he was entreating in a broken feeble voice
to leave him there to die, as the pain of his wounds would not suffer
him to go any farther. Claudia and Roque threw themselves off their
horses and advanced towards him; the servants were overawed by the
appearance of Roque, and Claudia was moved by the sight of Don
Vicente, and going up to him half tenderly half sternly, she seized
his hand and said to him, "Hadst thou given me this according to our
compact thou hadst never come to this pass." The wounded gentleman
opened his all but closed eyes, and recognising Claudia said, "I see
clearly, fair and mistaken lady, that it is thou that hast slain me, a
punishment not merited or deserved by my feelings towards thee, for
never did I mean to, nor could I, wrong thee in thought or deed." "It
is not true, then," said Claudia, "that thou wert going this morning
to marry Leonora the daughter of the rich Balvastro?" "Assuredly not,"
replied Don Vicente; "my cruel fortune must have carried those tidings
to thee to drive thee in thy jealousy to take my life; and to assure
thyself of this, press my hands and take me for thy husband if thou
wilt; I have no better satisfaction to offer thee for the wrong thou
fanciest thou hast received from me." Claudia wrung his hands, and her
own heart was so wrung that she lay fainting on the bleeding breast of
Don Vicente, whom a death spasm seized the same instant. Roque was in
perplexity and knew not what to do; the servants ran to fetch water to
sprinkle their faces, and brought some and bathed them with it.
Claudia recovered from her fainting fit, but not so Don Vicente from
the paroxysm that had overtaken him, for his life had come to an end.
On perceiving this, Claudia, when she had convinced herself that her
beloved husband was no more, rent the air with her sighs and made the
heavens ring with her lamentations; she tore her hair and scattered it
to the winds, she beat her face with her hands and showed all the
signs of grief and sorrow that could be conceived to come from an
afflicted heart. "Cruel, reckless woman!" she cried, "how easily wert
thou moved to carry out a thought so wicked! O furious force of
jealousy, to what desperate lengths dost thou lead those that give
thee lodging in their bosoms! O husband, whose unhappy fate in being
mine hath borne thee from the marriage bed to the grave!" So vehement
and so piteous were the lamentations of Claudia that they drew tears
from Roque's eyes, unused as they were to shed them on any occasion.
The servants wept, Claudia swooned away again and again, and the whole
place seemed a field of sorrow and an abode of misfortune. In the end
Roque Guinart directed Don Vicente's servants to carry his body to his
father's village, which was close by, for burial. Claudia told him she
meant to go to a monastery of which an aunt of hers was abbess, where
she intended to pass her life with a better and everlasting spouse. He
applauded her pious resolution, and offered to accompany her
whithersoever she wished, and to protect her father against the
kinsmen of Don Vicente and all the world, should they seek to injure
him. Claudia would not on any account allow him to accompany her; and
thanking him for his offers as well as she could, took leave of him in
tears. The servants of Don Vicente carried away his body, and Roque
returned to his comrades, and so ended the love of Claudia Jeronima;
but what wonder, when it was the insuperable and cruel might of
jealousy that wove the web of her sad story? Roque Guinart found his
squires at the place to which he had ordered them, and Don Quixote on
Rocinante in the midst of them delivering a harangue to them in which
he urged them to give up a mode of life so full of peril, as well to
the soul as to the body; but as most of them were Gascons, rough
lawless fellows, his speech did not make much impression on them.
Roque on coming up asked Sancho if his men had returned and restored
to him the treasures and jewels they had stripped off Dapple. Sancho
said they had, but that three kerchiefs that were worth three cities
were missing. "What are you talking about, man?" said one of the
bystanders; "I have got them, and they are not worth three reals."
"That is true," said Don Quixote; "but at present I am not aware that
I have got anything of yours, Master Pedro." "What!" returned Master
Pedro; "and these relics lying here on the bare hard ground--what
scattered and shattered them but the invincible strength of that
mighty arm? And whose were the bodies they belonged to but mine? And
what did I get my living by but by them?" "Now am I fully convinced,"
said Don Quixote, "of what I had many a time before believed; that the
enchanters who persecute me do nothing more than put figures like
these before my eyes, and then change and turn them into what they
please. In truth and earnest, I assure you gentlemen who now hear me,
that to me everything that has taken place here seemed to take place
literally, that Melisendra was Melisendra, Don Gaiferos Don Gaiferos,
Marsilio Marsilio, and Charlemagne Charlemagne. That was why my anger
was roused; and to be faithful to my calling as a knight-errant I
sought to give aid and protection to those who fled, and with this
good intention I did what you have seen. If the result has been the
opposite of what I intended, it is no fault of mine, but of those
wicked beings that persecute me; but, for all that, I am willing to
condemn myself in costs for this error of mine, though it did not
proceed from malice; let Master Pedro see what he wants for the
spoiled figures, for I agree to pay it at once in good and current
money of Castile." Master Pedro made him a bow, saying, "I expected no
less of the rare Christianity of the valiant Don Quixote of La Mancha,
true helper and protector of all destitute and needy vagabonds; master
landlord here and the great Sancho Panza shall be the arbitrators and
appraisers between your worship and me of what these dilapidated
figures are worth or may be worth." The landlord and Sancho consented,
and then Master Pedro picked up from the ground King Marsilio of
Saragossa with his head off, and said, "Here you see how impossible it
is to restore this king to his former state, so I think, saving your
better judgments, that for his death, decease, and demise, four reals
and a half may be given me." "Proceed," said Don Quixote. "Well then,
for this cleavage from top to bottom," continued Master Pedro, taking
up the split Emperor Charlemagne, "it would not be much if I were to
ask five reals and a quarter." "It's not little," said Sancho. "Nor is
it much," said the landlord; "make it even, and say five reals." "Let
him have the whole five and a quarter," said Don Quixote; "for the sum
total of this notable disaster does not stand on a quarter more or
less; and make an end of it quickly, Master Pedro, for it's getting on
to supper-time, and I have some hints of hunger." "For this figure,"
said Master Pedro, "that is without a nose, and wants an eye, and is
the fair Melisendra, I ask, and I am reasonable in my charge, two
reals and twelve maravedis." "The very devil must be in it," said Don
Quixote, "if Melisendra and her husband are not by this time at least
on the French border, for the horse they rode on seemed to me to fly
rather than gallop; so you needn't try to sell me the cat for the
hare, showing me here a noseless Melisendra when she is now, may be,
enjoying herself at her ease with her husband in France. God help
every one to his own, Master Pedro, and let us all proceed fairly and
honestly; and now go on." Master Pedro, perceiving that Don Quixote
was beginning to wander, and return to his original fancy, was not
disposed to let him escape, so he said to him, "This cannot be
Melisendra, but must be one of the damsels that waited on her; so if
I'm given sixty maravedis for her, I'll be content and sufficiently
paid." And so he went on, putting values on ever so many more smashed
figures, which, after the two arbitrators had adjusted them to the
satisfaction of both parties, came to forty reals and three-quarters;
and over and above this sum, which Sancho at once disbursed, Master
Pedro asked for two reals for his trouble in catching the ape. "Let
him have them, Sancho," said Don Quixote; "not to catch the ape, but
to get drunk; and two hundred would I give this minute for the good
news, to anyone who could tell me positively, that the lady Dona
Melisandra and Senor Don Gaiferos were now in France and with their
own people." "No one could tell us that better than my ape," said
Master Pedro; "but there's no devil that could catch him now; I
suspect, however, that affection and hunger will drive him to come
looking for me to-night; but to-morrow will soon be here and we shall
see." In short, the puppet-show storm passed off, and all supped in
peace and good fellowship at Don Quixote's expense, for he was the
height of generosity. Before it was daylight the man with the lances
and halberds took his departure, and soon after daybreak the cousin
and the page came to bid Don Quixote farewell, the former returning
home, the latter resuming his journey, towards which, to help him, Don
Quixote gave him twelve reals. Master Pedro did not care to engage in
any more palaver with Don Quixote, whom he knew right well; so he rose
before the sun, and having got together the remains of his show and
caught his ape, he too went off to seek his adventures. The landlord,
who did not know Don Quixote, was as much astonished at his mad freaks
as at his generosity. To conclude, Sancho, by his master's orders,
paid him very liberally, and taking leave of him they quitted the inn
at about eight in the morning and took to the road, where we will
leave them to pursue their journey, for this is necessary in order to
allow certain other matters to be set forth, which are required to
clear up this famous history. CHAPTER XXVII. WHEREIN IT IS SHOWN WHO
MASTER PEDRO AND HIS APE WERE, TOGETHER WITH THE MISHAP DON QUIXOTE
HAD IN THE BRAYING ADVENTURE, WHICH HE DID NOT CONCLUDE AS HE WOULD
HAVE LIKED OR AS HE HAD EXPECTED CHAPTER XXVIII OF MATTERS THAT
BENENGELI SAYS HE WHO READS THEM WILL KNOW, IF HE READS THEM WITH
ATTENTION When the brave man flees, treachery is manifest and it is
for wise men to reserve themselves for better occasions. This proved
to be the case with Don Quixote, who, giving way before the fury of
the townsfolk and the hostile intentions of the angry troop, took to
flight and, without a thought of Sancho or the danger in which he was
leaving him, retreated to such a distance as he thought made him safe.
Sancho, lying across his ass, followed him, as has been said, and at
length came up, having by this time recovered his senses, and on
joining him let himself drop off Dapple at Rocinante's feet, sore,
bruised, and belaboured. Don Quixote dismounted to examine his wounds,
but finding him whole from head to foot, he said to him, angrily
enough, "In an evil hour didst thou take to braying, Sancho! Where
hast thou learned that it is well done to mention the rope in the
house of the man that has been hanged? To the music of brays what
harmonies couldst thou expect to get but cudgels? Give thanks to God,
Sancho, that they signed the cross on thee just now with a stick, and
did not mark thee per signum crucis with a cutlass." "I'm not equal to
answering," said Sancho, "for I feel as if I was speaking through my
shoulders; let us mount and get away from this; I'll keep from
braying, but not from saying that knights-errant fly and leave their
good squires to be pounded like privet, or made meal of at the hands
of their enemies." "He does not fly who retires," returned Don
Quixote; "for I would have thee know, Sancho, that the valour which is
not based upon a foundation of prudence is called rashness, and the
exploits of the rash man are to be attributed rather to good fortune
than to courage; and so I own that I retired, but not that I fled; and
therein I have followed the example of many valiant men who have
reserved themselves for better times; the histories are full of
instances of this, but as it would not be any good to thee or pleasure
to me, I will not recount them to thee now." Sancho was by this time
mounted with the help of Don Quixote, who then himself mounted
Rocinante, and at a leisurely pace they proceeded to take shelter in a
grove which was in sight about a quarter of a league off. Every now
and then Sancho gave vent to deep sighs and dismal groans, and on Don
Quixote asking him what caused such acute suffering, he replied that,
from the end of his back-bone up to the nape of his neck, he was so
sore that it nearly drove him out of his senses. "The cause of that
soreness," said Don Quixote, "will be, no doubt, that the staff
wherewith they smote thee being a very long one, it caught thee all
down the back, where all the parts that are sore are situated, and had
it reached any further thou wouldst be sorer still." "By God," said
Sancho, "your worship has relieved me of a great doubt, and cleared up
the point for me in elegant style! Body o' me! is the cause of my
soreness such a mystery that there's any need to tell me I am sore
everywhere the staff hit me? If it was my ankles that pained me there
might be something in going divining why they did, but it is not much
to divine that I'm sore where they thrashed me. By my faith, master
mine, the ills of others hang by a hair; every day I am discovering
more and more how little I have to hope for from keeping company with
your worship; for if this time you have allowed me to be drubbed, the
next time, or a hundred times more, we'll have the blanketings of the
other day over again, and all the other pranks which, if they have
fallen on my shoulders now, will be thrown in my teeth by-and-by. I
would do a great deal better (if I was not an ignorant brute that will
never do any good all my life), I would do a great deal better, I say,
to go home to my wife and children and support them and bring them up
on what God may please to give me, instead of following your worship
along roads that lead nowhere and paths that are none at all, with
little to drink and less to eat. And then when it comes to sleeping!
Measure out seven feet on the earth, brother squire, and if that's not
enough for you, take as many more, for you may have it all your own
way and stretch yourself to your heart's content. Oh that I could see
burnt and turned to ashes the first man that meddled with
knight-errantry or at any rate the first who chose to be squire to
such fools as all the knights-errant of past times must have been! Of
those of the present day I say nothing, because, as your worship is
one of them, I respect them, and because I know your worship knows a
point more than the devil in all you say and think." "I would lay a
good wager with you, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "that now that you are
talking on without anyone to stop you, you don't feel a pain in your
whole body. Talk away, my son, say whatever comes into your head or
mouth, for so long as you feel no pain, the irritation your
impertinences give me will be a pleasure to me; and if you are so
anxious to go home to your wife and children, God forbid that I should
prevent you; you have money of mine; see how long it is since we left
our village this third time, and how much you can and ought to earn
every month, and pay yourself out of your own hand." "When I worked
for Tom Carrasco, the father of the bachelor Samson Carrasco that your
worship knows," replied Sancho, "I used to earn two ducats a month
besides my food; I can't tell what I can earn with your worship,
though I know a knight-errant's squire has harder times of it than he
who works for a farmer; for after all, we who work for farmers,
however much we toil all day, at the worst, at night, we have our olla
supper and sleep in a bed, which I have not slept in since I have been
in your worship's service, if it wasn't the short time we were in Don
Diego de Miranda's house, and the feast I had with the skimmings I
took off Camacho's pots, and what I ate, drank, and slept in Basilio's
house; all the rest of the time I have been sleeping on the hard
ground under the open sky, exposed to what they call the inclemencies
of heaven, keeping life in me with scraps of cheese and crusts of
bread, and drinking water either from the brooks or from the springs
we come to on these by-paths we travel." "I own, Sancho," said Don
Quixote, "that all thou sayest will come true; overlook the past, for
thou art shrewd enough to know that our first movements are not in our
own control; and one thing for the future bear in mind, that thou curb
and restrain thy loquacity in my company; for in all the books of
chivalry that I have read, and they are innumerable, I never met with
a squire who talked so much to his lord as thou dost to thine; and in
fact I feel it to be a great fault of thine and of mine: of thine,
that thou hast so little respect for me; of mine, that I do not make
myself more respected. There was Gandalin, the squire of Amadis of
Gaul, that was Count of the Insula Firme, and we read of him that he
always addressed his lord with his cap in his hand, his head bowed
down and his body bent double, more turquesco. And then, what shall we
say of Gasabal, the squire of Galaor, who was so silent that in order
to indicate to us the greatness of his marvellous taciturnity his name
is only once mentioned in the whole of that history, as long as it is
truthful? From all I have said thou wilt gather, Sancho, that there
must be a difference between master and man, between lord and lackey,
between knight and squire: so that from this day forward in our
intercourse we must observe more respect and take less liberties, for
in whatever way I may be provoked with you it will be bad for the
pitcher. The favours and benefits that I have promised you will come
in due time, and if they do not your wages at least will not be lost,
as I have already told you." "All that your worship says is very
well," said Sancho, "but I should like to know (in case the time of
favours should not come, and it might be necessary to fall back upon
wages) how much did the squire of a knight-errant get in those days,
and did they agree by the month, or by the day like bricklayers?" "I
do not believe," replied Don Quixote, "that such squires were ever on
wages, but were dependent on favour; and if I have now mentioned thine
in the sealed will I have left at home, it was with a view to what may
happen; for as yet I know not how chivalry will turn out in these
wretched times of ours, and I do not wish my soul to suffer for
trifles in the other world; for I would have thee know, Sancho, if
thou knowest it not, that with lovers the outward actions and motions
they give way to when their loves are in question are the faithful
messengers that carry the news of what is going on in the depths of
their hearts. Go, my friend, may better fortune than mine attend thee,
and bring thee a happier issue than that which I await in dread in
this dreary solitude." "I will go and return quickly," said Sancho;
"cheer up that little heart of yours, master mine, for at the present
moment you seem to have got one no bigger than a hazel nut; remember
what they say, that a stout heart breaks bad luck, and that where
there are no fletches there are no pegs; and moreover they say, the
hare jumps up where it's not looked for. I say this because, if we
could not find my lady's palaces or castles to-night, now that it is
daylight I count upon finding them when I least expect it, and once
found, leave it to me to manage her." "Verily, Sancho," said Don
Quixote, "thou dost always bring in thy proverbs happily, whatever we
deal with; may God give me better luck in what I am anxious about."
With this, Sancho wheeled about and gave Dapple the stick, and Don
Quixote remained behind, seated on his horse, resting in his stirrups
and leaning on the end of his lance, filled with sad and troubled
forebodings; and there we will leave him, and accompany Sancho, who
went off no less serious and troubled than he left his master; so much
so, that as soon as he had got out of the thicket, and looking round
saw that Don Quixote was not within sight, he dismounted from his ass,
and seating himself at the foot of a tree began to commune with
himself, saying, "Now, brother Sancho, let us know where your worship
is going. Are you going to look for some ass that has been lost? Not
at all. Then what are you going to look for? I am going to look for a
princess, that's all; and in her for the sun of beauty and the whole
heaven at once. And where do you expect to find all this, Sancho?
Where? Why, in the great city of El Toboso. Well, and for whom are you
going to look for her? For the famous knight Don Quixote of La Mancha,
and made him confess that my Casildea is more beautiful than his
Dulcinea; and in this one victory I hold myself to have conquered all
the knights in the world; for this Don Quixote that I speak of has
vanquished them all, and I having vanquished him, his glory, his fame,
and his honour have passed and are transferred to my person; for The
more the vanquished hath of fair renown, The greater glory gilds the
victor's crown. Thus the innumerable achievements of the said Don
Quixote are now set down to my account and have become mine." Don
Quixote was amazed when he heard the Knight of the Grove, and was a
thousand times on the point of telling him he lied, and had the lie
direct already on the tip of his tongue; but he restrained himself as
well as he could, in order to force him to confess the lie with his
own lips; so he said to him quietly, "As to what you say, sir knight,
about having vanquished most of the knights of Spain, or even of the
whole world, I say nothing; but that you have vanquished Don Quixote
of La Mancha I consider doubtful; it may have been some other that
resembled him, although there are few like him." "How! not
vanquished?" said he of the Grove; "by the heaven that is above us I
fought Don Quixote and overcame him and made him yield; and he is a
man of tall stature, gaunt features, long, lank limbs, with hair
turning grey, an aquiline nose rather hooked, and large black drooping
moustaches; he does battle under the name of 'The Countenance,' and he
has for squire a peasant called Sancho Panza; he presses the loins and
rules the reins of a famous steed called Rocinante; and lastly, he has
for the mistress of his will a certain Dulcinea del Toboso, once upon
a time called Aldonza Lorenzo, just as I call mine Casildea de
Vandalia because her name is Casilda and she is of Andalusia. If all
these tokens are not enough to vindicate the truth of what I say, here
is my sword, that will compel incredulity itself to give credence to
it." "Calm yourself, sir knight," said Don Quixote, "and give ear to
what I am about to say to you. I would have you know that this Don
Quixote you speak of is the greatest friend I have in the world; so
much so that I may say I regard him in the same light as my own
person; and from the precise and clear indications you have given I
cannot but think that he must be the very one you have vanquished. On
the other hand, I see with my eyes and feel with my hands that it is
impossible it can have been the same; unless indeed it be that, as he
has many enemies who are enchanters, and one in particular who is
always persecuting him, some one of these may have taken his shape in
order to allow himself to be vanquished, so as to defraud him of the
fame that his exalted achievements as a knight have earned and
acquired for him throughout the known world. And in confirmation of
this, I must tell you, too, that it is but ten hours since these said
enchanters his enemies transformed the shape and person of the fair
Dulcinea del Toboso into a foul and mean village lass, and in the same
way they must have transformed Don Quixote; and if all this does not
suffice to convince you of the truth of what I say, let me repeat to
thee a stanza made by the famous poet Luigi Tansillo at the end of the
first part of his 'Tears of Saint Peter,' which says thus: The anguish
and the shame but greater grew In Peter's heart as morning slowly
came; No eye was there to see him, well he knew, Yet he himself was to
himself a shame; Exposed to all men's gaze, or screened from view, A
noble heart will feel the pang the same; A prey to shame the sinning
soul will be, Though none but heaven and earth its shame can see. Thus
by keeping it secret thou wilt not escape thy sorrow, but rather thou
wilt shed tears unceasingly, if not tears of the eyes, tears of blood
from the heart, like those shed by that simple doctor our poet tells
us of, that tried the test of the cup, which the wise Rinaldo, better
advised, refused to do; for though this may be a poetic fiction it
contains a moral lesson worthy of attention and study and imitation.
Moreover by what I am about to say to thee thou wilt be led to see the
great error thou wouldst commit. "Tell me, Anselmo, if Heaven or good
fortune had made thee master and lawful owner of a diamond of the
finest quality, with the excellence and purity of which all the
lapidaries that had seen it had been satisfied, saying with one voice
and common consent that in purity, quality, and fineness, it was all
that a stone of the kind could possibly be, thou thyself too being of
the same belief, as knowing nothing to the contrary, would it be
reasonable in thee to desire to take that diamond and place it between
an anvil and a hammer, and by mere force of blows and strength of arm
try if it were as hard and as fine as they said? And if thou didst,
and if the stone should resist so silly a test, that would add nothing
to its value or reputation; and if it were broken, as it might be,
would not all be lost? Undoubtedly it would, leaving its owner to be
rated as a fool in the opinion of all. Consider, then, Anselmo my
friend, that Camilla is a diamond of the finest quality as well in thy
estimation as in that of others, and that it is contrary to reason to
expose her to the risk of being broken; for if she remains intact she
cannot rise to a higher value than she now possesses; and if she give
way and be unable to resist, bethink thee now how thou wilt be
deprived of her, and with what good reason thou wilt complain of
thyself for having been the cause of her ruin and thine own. Remember
there is no jewel in the world so precious as a chaste and virtuous
woman, and that the whole honour of women consists in reputation; and
since thy wife's is of that high excellence that thou knowest,
wherefore shouldst thou seek to call that truth in question? Remember,
my friend, that woman is an imperfect animal, and that impediments are
not to be placed in her way to make her trip and fall, but that they
should be removed, and her path left clear of all obstacles, so that
without hindrance she may run her course freely to attain the desired
perfection, which consists in being virtuous. Naturalists tell us that
the ermine is a little animal which has a fur of purest white, and
that when the hunters wish to take it, they make use of this artifice.
Having ascertained the places which it frequents and passes, they stop
the way to them with mud, and then rousing it, drive it towards the
spot, and as soon as the ermine comes to the mud it halts, and allows
itself to be taken captive rather than pass through the mire, and
spoil and sully its whiteness, which it values more than life and
liberty. The virtuous and chaste woman is an ermine, and whiter and
purer than snow is the virtue of modesty; and he who wishes her not to
lose it, but to keep and preserve it, must adopt a course different
from that employed with the ermine; he must not put before her the
mire of the gifts and attentions of persevering lovers, because
perhaps--and even without a perhaps--she may not have sufficient
virtue and natural strength in herself to pass through and tread under
foot these impediments; they must be removed, and the brightness of
virtue and the beauty of a fair fame must be put before her. A
virtuous woman, too, is like a mirror, of clear shining crystal,
liable to be tarnished and dimmed by every breath that touches it. She
must be treated as relics are; adored, not touched. She must be
protected and prized as one protects and prizes a fair garden full of
roses and flowers, the owner of which allows no one to trespass or
pluck a blossom; enough for others that from afar and through the iron
grating they may enjoy its fragrance and its beauty. Finally let me
repeat to thee some verses that come to my mind; I heard them in a
modern comedy, and it seems to me they bear upon the point we are
discussing. A prudent old man was giving advice to another, the father
of a young girl, to lock her up, watch over her and keep her in
seclusion, and among other arguments he used these: Woman is a thing
of glass; But her brittleness 'tis best Not too curiously to test: Who
knows what may come to pass? Breaking is an easy matter, And it's
folly to expose What you cannot mend to blows; What you can't make
whole to shatter. This, then, all may hold as true, And the reason's
plain to see; For if Danaes there be, There are golden showers too.
"All that I have said to thee so far, Anselmo, has had reference to
what concerns thee; now it is right that I should say something of
what regards myself; and if I be prolix, pardon me, for the labyrinth
into which thou hast entered and from which thou wouldst have me
extricate thee makes it necessary. "Thou dost reckon me thy friend,
and thou wouldst rob me of honour, a thing wholly inconsistent with
friendship; and not only dost thou aim at this, but thou wouldst have
me rob thee of it is beyond a doubt, for Camilla, seeing that I press
my suit upon her, will suppose that I have perceived in her something
light that has encouraged me to make known to her my base desire; and
if she holds herself dishonoured, her dishonour touches thee as
belonging to her; and hence arises what so commonly takes place, that
the husband of the adulterous woman, though he may not be aware of or
have given any cause for his wife's failure in her duty, or (being
careless or negligent) have had it in his power to prevent his
dishonour, nevertheless is stigmatised by a vile and reproachful name,
and in a manner regarded with eyes of contempt instead of pity by all
who know of his wife's guilt, though they see that he is unfortunate
not by his own fault, but by the lust of a vicious consort. But I will
tell thee why with good reason dishonour attaches to the husband of
the unchaste wife, though he know not that she is so, nor be to blame,
nor have done anything, or given any provocation to make her so; and
be not weary with listening to me, for it will be for thy good. "When
God created our first parent in the earthly paradise, the Holy
Scripture says that he infused sleep into Adam and while he slept took
a rib from his left side of which he formed our mother Eve, and when
Adam awoke and beheld her he said, 'This is flesh of my flesh, and
bone of my bone.' And God said 'For this shall a man leave his father
and his mother, and they shall be two in one flesh; and then was
instituted the divine sacrament of marriage, with such ties that death
alone can loose them. And such is the force and virtue of this
miraculous sacrament that it makes two different persons one and the
same flesh; and even more than this when the virtuous are married; for
though they have two souls they have but one will. And hence it
follows that as the flesh of the wife is one and the same with that of
her husband the stains that may come upon it, or the injuries it
incurs fall upon the husband's flesh, though he, as has been said, may
have given no cause for them; for as the pain of the foot or any
member of the body is felt by the whole body, because all is one
flesh, as the head feels the hurt to the ankle without having caused
it, so the husband, being one with her, shares the dishonour of the
wife; and as all worldly honour or dishonour comes of flesh and blood,
and the erring wife's is of that kind, the husband must needs bear his
part of it and be held dishonoured without knowing it. See, then,
Anselmo, the peril thou art encountering in seeking to disturb the
peace of thy virtuous consort; see for what an empty and ill-advised
curiosity thou wouldst rouse up passions that now repose in quiet in
the breast of thy chaste wife; reflect that what thou art staking all
to win is little, and what thou wilt lose so much that I leave it
undescribed, not having the words to express it. But if all I have
said be not enough to turn thee from thy vile purpose, thou must seek
some other instrument for thy dishonour and misfortune; for such I
will not consent to be, though I lose thy friendship, the greatest
loss that I can conceive." Having said this, the wise and virtuous
Lothario was silent, and Anselmo, troubled in mind and deep in
thought, was unable for a while to utter a word in reply; but at
length he said, "I have listened, Lothario my friend, attentively, as
thou hast seen, to what thou hast chosen to say to me, and in thy
arguments, examples, and comparisons I have seen that high
intelligence thou dost possess, and the perfection of true friendship
thou hast reached; and likewise I see and confess that if I am not
guided by thy opinion, but follow my own, I am flying from the good
and pursuing the evil. This being so, thou must remember that I am now
labouring under that infirmity which women sometimes suffer from, when
the craving seizes them to eat clay, plaster, charcoal, and things
even worse, disgusting to look at, much more to eat; so that it will
be necessary to have recourse to some artifice to cure me; and this
can be easily effected if only thou wilt make a beginning, even though
it be in a lukewarm and make-believe fashion, to pay court to Camilla,
who will not be so yielding that her virtue will give way at the first
attack: with this mere attempt I shall rest satisfied, and thou wilt
have done what our friendship binds thee to do, not only in giving me
life, but in persuading me not to discard my honour. And this thou art
bound to do for one reason alone, that, being, as I am, resolved to
apply this test, it is not for thee to permit me to reveal my weakness
to another, and so imperil that honour thou art striving to keep me
from losing; and if thine may not stand as high as it ought in the
estimation of Camilla while thou art paying court to her, that is of
little or no importance, because ere long, on finding in her that
constancy which we expect, thou canst tell her the plain truth as
regards our stratagem, and so regain thy place in her esteem; and as
thou art venturing so little, and by the venture canst afford me so
much satisfaction, refuse not to undertake it, even if further
difficulties present themselves to thee; for, as I have said, if thou
wilt only make a beginning I will acknowledge the issue decided."
Lothario seeing the fixed determination of Anselmo, and not knowing
what further examples to offer or arguments to urge in order to
dissuade him from it, and perceiving that he threatened to confide his
pernicious scheme to some one else, to avoid a greater evil resolved
to gratify him and do what he asked, intending to manage the business
so as to satisfy Anselmo without corrupting the mind of Camilla; so in
reply he told him not to communicate his purpose to any other, for he
would undertake the task himself, and would begin it as soon as he
pleased. Anselmo embraced him warmly and affectionately, and thanked
him for his offer as if he had bestowed some great favour upon him;
and it was agreed between them to set about it the next day, Anselmo
affording opportunity and time to Lothario to converse alone with
Camilla, and furnishing him with money and jewels to offer and present
to her. He suggested, too, that he should treat her to music, and
write verses in her praise, and if he was unwilling to take the
trouble of composing them, he offered to do it himself. Lothario
agreed to all with an intention very different from what Anselmo
supposed, and with this understanding they returned to Anselmo's
house, where they found Camilla awaiting her husband anxiously and
uneasily, for he was later than usual in returning that day. Lothario
repaired to his own house, and Anselmo remained in his, as well
satisfied as Lothario was troubled in mind; for he could see no
satisfactory way out of this ill-advised business. That night,
however, he thought of a plan by which he might deceive Anselmo
without any injury to Camilla. The next day he went to dine with his
friend, and was welcomed by Camilla, who received and treated him with
great cordiality, knowing the affection her husband felt for him. When
dinner was over and the cloth removed, Anselmo told Lothario to stay
there with Camilla while he attended to some pressing business, as he
would return in an hour and a half. Camilla begged him not to go, and
Lothario offered to accompany him, but nothing could persuade Anselmo,
who on the contrary pressed Lothario to remain waiting for him as he
had a matter of great importance to discuss with him. At the same time
he bade Camilla not to leave Lothario alone until he came back. In
short he contrived to put so good a face on the reason, or the folly,
of his absence that no one could have suspected it was a pretence.
Anselmo took his departure, and Camilla and Lothario were left alone
at the table, for the rest of the household had gone to dinner.
Lothario saw himself in the lists according to his friend's wish, and
facing an enemy that could by her beauty alone vanquish a squadron of
armed knights; judge whether he had good reason to fear; but what he
did was to lean his elbow on the arm of the chair, and his cheek upon
his hand, and, asking Camilla's pardon for his ill manners, he said he
wished to take a little sleep until Anselmo returned. Camilla in reply
said he could repose more at his ease in the reception-room than in
his chair, and begged of him to go in and sleep there; but Lothario
declined, and there he remained asleep until the return of Anselmo,
who finding Camilla in her own room, and Lothario asleep, imagined
that he had stayed away so long as to have afforded them time enough
for conversation and even for sleep, and was all impatience until
Lothario should wake up, that he might go out with him and question
him as to his success. Everything fell out as he wished; Lothario
awoke, and the two at once left the house, and Anselmo asked what he
was anxious to know, and Lothario in answer told him that he had not
thought it advisable to declare himself entirely the first time, and
therefore had only extolled the charms of Camilla, telling her that
all the city spoke of nothing else but her beauty and wit, for this
seemed to him an excellent way of beginning to gain her good-will and
render her disposed to listen to him with pleasure the next time, thus
availing himself of the device the devil has recourse to when he would
deceive one who is on the watch; for he being the angel of darkness
transforms himself into an angel of light, and, under cover of a fair
seeming, discloses himself at length, and effects his purpose if at
the beginning his wiles are not discovered. All this gave great
satisfaction to Anselmo, and he said he would afford the same
opportunity every day, but without leaving the house, for he would
find things to do at home so that Camilla should not detect the plot.
Thus, then, several days went by, and Lothario, without uttering a
word to Camilla, reported to Anselmo that he had talked with her and
that he had never been able to draw from her the slightest indication
of consent to anything dishonourable, nor even a sign or shadow of
hope; on the contrary, he said she would inform her husband of it. "So
far well," said Anselmo; "Camilla has thus far resisted words; we must
now see how she will resist deeds. I will give you to-morrow two
thousand crowns in gold for you to offer or even present, and as many
more to buy jewels to lure her, for women are fond of being becomingly
attired and going gaily dressed, and all the more so if they are
beautiful, however chaste they may be; and if she resists this
temptation, I will rest satisfied and will give you no more trouble."
Lothario replied that now he had begun he would carry on the
undertaking to the end, though he perceived he was to come out of it
wearied and vanquished. The next day he received the four thousand
crowns, and with them four thousand perplexities, for he knew not what
to say by way of a new falsehood; but in the end he made up his mind
to tell him that Camilla stood as firm against gifts and promises as
against words, and that there was no use in taking any further
trouble, for the time was all spent to no purpose. But chance,
directing things in a different manner, so ordered it that Anselmo,
having left Lothario and Camilla alone as on other occasions, shut
himself into a chamber and posted himself to watch and listen through
the keyhole to what passed between them, and perceived that for more
than half an hour Lothario did not utter a word to Camilla, nor would
utter a word though he were to be there for an age; and he came to the
conclusion that what his friend had told him about the replies of
Camilla was all invention and falsehood, and to ascertain if it were
so, he came out, and calling Lothario aside asked him what news he had
and in what humour Camilla was. Lothario replied that he was not
disposed to go on with the business, for she had answered him so
angrily and harshly that he had no heart to say anything more to her.
"Ah, Lothario, Lothario," said Anselmo, "how ill dost thou meet thy
obligations to me, and the great confidence I repose in thee! I have
been just now watching through this keyhole, and I have seen that thou
has not said a word to Camilla, whence I conclude that on the former
occasions thou hast not spoken to her either, and if this be so, as no
doubt it is, why dost thou deceive me, or wherefore seekest thou by
craft to deprive me of the means I might find of attaining my desire?"
Anselmo said no more, but he had said enough to cover Lothario with
shame and confusion, and he, feeling as it were his honour touched by
having been detected in a lie, swore to Anselmo that he would from
that moment devote himself to satisfying him without any deception, as
he would see if he had the curiosity to watch; though he need not take
the trouble, for the pains he would take to satisfy him would remove
all suspicions from his mind. Anselmo believed him, and to afford him
an opportunity more free and less liable to surprise, he resolved to
absent himself from his house for eight days, betaking himself to that
of a friend of his who lived in a village not far from the city; and,
the better to account for his departure to Camilla, he so arranged it
that the friend should send him a very pressing invitation. Unhappy,
shortsighted Anselmo, what art thou doing, what art thou plotting,
what art thou devising? Bethink thee thou art working against thyself,
plotting thine own dishonour, devising thine own ruin. Thy wife
Camilla is virtuous, thou dost possess her in peace and quietness, no
one assails thy happiness, her thoughts wander not beyond the walls of
thy house, thou art her heaven on earth, the object of her wishes, the
fulfilment of her desires, the measure wherewith she measures her
will, making it conform in all things to thine and Heaven's. If, then,
the mine of her honour, beauty, virtue, and modesty yields thee
without labour all the wealth it contains and thou canst wish for, why
wilt thou dig the earth in search of fresh veins, of new unknown
treasure, risking the collapse of all, since it but rests on the
feeble props of her weak nature? Bethink thee that from him who seeks
impossibilities that which is possible may with justice be withheld,
as was better expressed by a poet who said: 'Tis mine to seek for life
in death, Health in disease seek I, I seek in prison freedom's breath,
In traitors loyalty. So Fate that ever scorns to grant Or grace or
boon to me, Since what can never be I want, Denies me what might be.
The next day Anselmo took his departure for the village, leaving
instructions with Camilla that during his absence Lothario would come
to look after his house and to dine with her, and that she was to
treat him as she would himself. Camilla was distressed, as a discreet
and right-minded woman would be, at the orders her husband left her,
and bade him remember that it was not becoming that anyone should
occupy his seat at the table during his absence, and if he acted thus
from not feeling confidence that she would be able to manage his
house, let him try her this time, and he would find by experience that
she was equal to greater responsibilities. Anselmo replied that it was
his pleasure to have it so, and that she had only to submit and obey.
Camilla said she would do so, though against her will. Anselmo went,
and the next day Lothario came to his house, where he was received by
Camilla with a friendly and modest welcome; but she never suffered
Lothario to see her alone, for she was always attended by her men and
women servants, especially by a handmaid of hers, Leonela by name, to
whom she was much attached (for they had been brought up together from
childhood in her father's house), and whom she had kept with her after
her marriage with Anselmo. The first three days Lothario did not speak
to her, though he might have done so when they removed the cloth and
the servants retired to dine hastily; for such were Camilla's orders;
nay more, Leonela had directions to dine earlier than Camilla and
never to leave her side. She, however, having her thoughts fixed upon
other things more to her taste, and wanting that time and opportunity
for her own pleasures, did not always obey her mistress's commands,
but on the contrary left them alone, as if they had ordered her to do
so; but the modest bearing of Camilla, the calmness of her
countenance, the composure of her aspect were enough to bridle the
tongue of Lothario. But the influence which the many virtues of
Camilla exerted in imposing silence on Lothario's tongue proved
mischievous for both of them, for if his tongue was silent his
thoughts were busy, and could dwell at leisure upon the perfections of
Camilla's goodness and beauty one by one, charms enough to warm with
love a marble statue, not to say a heart of flesh. Lothario gazed upon
her when he might have been speaking to her, and thought how worthy of
being loved she was; and thus reflection began little by little to
assail his allegiance to Anselmo, and a thousand times he thought of
withdrawing from the city and going where Anselmo should never see him
nor he see Camilla. But already the delight he found in gazing on her
interposed and held him fast. He put a constraint upon himself, and
struggled to repel and repress the pleasure he found in contemplating
Camilla; when alone he blamed himself for his weakness, called himself
a bad friend, nay a bad Christian; then he argued the matter and
compared himself with Anselmo; always coming to the conclusion that
the folly and rashness of Anselmo had been worse than his
faithlessness, and that if he could excuse his intentions as easily
before God as with man, he had no reason to fear any punishment for
his offence. In short the beauty and goodness of Camilla, joined with
the opportunity which the blind husband had placed in his hands,
overthrew the loyalty of Lothario; and giving heed to nothing save the
object towards which his inclinations led him, after Anselmo had been
three days absent, during which he had been carrying on a continual
struggle with his passion, he began to make love to Camilla with so
much vehemence and warmth of language that she was overwhelmed with
amazement, and could only rise from her place and retire to her room
without answering him a word. But the hope which always springs up
with love was not weakened in Lothario by this repelling demeanour; on
the contrary his passion for Camilla increased, and she discovering in
him what she had never expected, knew not what to do; and considering
it neither safe nor right to give him the chance or opportunity of
speaking to her again, she resolved to send, as she did that very
night, one of her servants with a letter to Anselmo, in which she
addressed the following words to him. CHAPTER XXXIV. IN WHICH IS
CONTINUED THE NOVEL OF "THE ILL-ADVISED CURIOSITY" "It is commonly
said that an army looks ill without its general and a castle without
its castellan, and I say that a young married woman looks still worse
without her husband unless there are very good reasons for it. I find
myself so ill at ease without you, and so incapable of enduring this
separation, that unless you return quickly I shall have to go for
relief to my parents' house, even if I leave yours without a
protector; for the one you left me, if indeed he deserved that title,
has, I think, more regard to his own pleasure than to what concerns
you: as you are possessed of discernment I need say no more to you,
nor indeed is it fitting I should say more." Anselmo received this
letter, and from it he gathered that Lothario had already begun his
task and that Camilla must have replied to him as he would have
wished; and delighted beyond measure at such intelligence he sent word
to her not to leave his house on any account, as he would very shortly
return. Camilla was astonished at Anselmo's reply, which placed her in
greater perplexity than before, for she neither dared to remain in her
own house, nor yet to go to her parents'; for in remaining her virtue
was imperilled, and in going she was opposing her husband's commands.
Finally she decided upon what was the worse course for her, to remain,
resolving not to fly from the presence of Lothario, that she might not
give food for gossip to her servants; and she now began to regret
having written as she had to her husband, fearing he might imagine
that Lothario had perceived in her some lightness which had impelled
him to lay aside the respect he owed her; but confident of her
rectitude she put her trust in God and in her own virtuous intentions,
with which she hoped to resist in silence all the solicitations of
Lothario, without saying anything to her husband so as not to involve
him in any quarrel or trouble; and she even began to consider how to
excuse Lothario to Anselmo when he should ask her what it was that
induced her to write that letter. With these resolutions, more
honourable than judicious or effectual, she remained the next day
listening to Lothario, who pressed his suit so strenuously that
Camilla's firmness began to waver, and her virtue had enough to do to
come to the rescue of her eyes and keep them from showing signs of a
certain tender compassion which the tears and appeals of Lothario had
awakened in her bosom. Lothario observed all this, and it inflamed him
all the more. In short he felt that while Anselmo's absence afforded
time and opportunity he must press the siege of the fortress, and so
he assailed her self-esteem with praises of her beauty, for there is
nothing that more quickly reduces and levels the castle towers of fair
women's vanity than vanity itself upon the tongue of flattery. In fact
with the utmost assiduity he undermined the rock of her purity with
such engines that had Camilla been of brass she must have fallen. He
wept, he entreated, he promised, he flattered, he importuned, he
pretended with so much feeling and apparent sincerity, that he
overthrew the virtuous resolves of Camilla and won the triumph he
least expected and most longed for. Camilla yielded, Camilla fell; but
what wonder if the friendship of Lothario could not stand firm? A
clear proof to us that the passion of love is to be conquered only by
flying from it, and that no one should engage in a struggle with an
enemy so mighty; for divine strength is needed to overcome his human
power. Leonela alone knew of her mistress's weakness, for the two
false friends and new lovers were unable to conceal it. Lothario did
not care to tell Camilla the object Anselmo had in view, nor that he
had afforded him the opportunity of attaining such a result, lest she
should undervalue his love and think that it was by chance and without
intending it and not of his own accord that he had made love to her. A
few days later Anselmo returned to his house and did not perceive what
it had lost, that which he so lightly treated and so highly prized. He
went at once to see Lothario, and found him at home; they embraced
each other, and Anselmo asked for the tidings of his life or his
death. "The tidings I have to give thee, Anselmo my friend," said
Lothario, "are that thou dost possess a wife that is worthy to be the
pattern and crown of all good wives. The words that I have addressed
to her were borne away on the wind, my promises have been despised, my
presents have been refused, such feigned tears as I shed have been
turned into open ridicule. In short, as Camilla is the essence of all
beauty, so is she the treasure-house where purity dwells, and
gentleness and modesty abide with all the virtues that can confer
praise, honour, and happiness upon a woman. Take back thy money, my
friend; here it is, and I have had no need to touch it, for the
chastity of Camilla yields not to things so base as gifts or promises.
Be content, Anselmo, and refrain from making further proof; and as
thou hast passed dryshod through the sea of those doubts and
suspicions that are and may be entertained of women, seek not to
plunge again into the deep ocean of new embarrassments, or with
another pilot make trial of the goodness and strength of the bark that
Heaven has granted thee for thy passage across the sea of this world;
but reckon thyself now safe in port, moor thyself with the anchor of
sound reflection, and rest in peace until thou art called upon to pay
that debt which no nobility on earth can escape paying." Anselmo was
completely satisfied by the words of Lothario, and believed them as
fully as if they had been spoken by an oracle; nevertheless he begged
of him not to relinquish the undertaking, were it but for the sake of
curiosity and amusement; though thenceforward he need not make use of
the same earnest endeavours as before; all he wished him to do was to
write some verses to her, praising her under the name of Chloris, for
he himself would give her to understand that he was in love with a
lady to whom he had given that name to enable him to sing her praises
with the decorum due to her modesty; and if Lothario were unwilling to
take the trouble of writing the verses he would compose them himself.
"That will not be necessary," said Lothario, "for the muses are not
such enemies of mine but that they visit me now and then in the course
of the year. Do thou tell Camilla what thou hast proposed about a
pretended amour of mine; as for the verses will make them, and if not
as good as the subject deserves, they shall be at least the best I can
produce." An agreement to this effect was made between the friends,
the ill-advised one and the treacherous, and Anselmo returning to his
house asked Camilla the question she already wondered he had not asked
before--what it was that had caused her to write the letter she had
sent him. Camilla replied that it had seemed to her that Lothario
looked at her somewhat more freely than when he had been at home; but
that now she was undeceived and believed it to have been only her own
imagination, for Lothario now avoided seeing her, or being alone with
her. Anselmo told her she might be quite easy on the score of that
suspicion, for he knew that Lothario was in love with a damsel of rank
in the city whom he celebrated under the name of Chloris, and that
even if he were not, his fidelity and their great friendship left no
room for fear. Had not Camilla, however, been informed beforehand by
Lothario that this love for Chloris was a pretence, and that he
himself had told Anselmo of it in order to be able sometimes to give
utterance to the praises of Camilla herself, no doubt she would have
fallen into the despairing toils of jealousy; but being forewarned she
received the startling news without uneasiness. The next day as the
three were at table Anselmo asked Lothario to recite something of what
he had composed for his mistress Chloris; for as Camilla did not know
her, he might safely say what he liked. "Even did she know her,"
returned Lothario, "I would hide nothing, for when a lover praises his
lady's beauty, and charges her with cruelty, he casts no imputation
upon her fair name; at any rate, all I can say is that yesterday I
made a sonnet on the ingratitude of this Chloris, which goes thus:
SONNET At midnight, in the silence, when the eyes Of happier mortals
balmy slumbers close, The weary tale of my unnumbered woes To Chloris
and to Heaven is wont to rise. And when the light of day returning
dyes The portals of the east with tints of rose, With undiminished
force my sorrow flows In broken accents and in burning sighs. And when
the sun ascends his star-girt throne, And on the earth pours down his
midday beams, Noon but renews my wailing and my tears; And with the
night again goes up my moan. Yet ever in my agony it seems To me that
neither Heaven nor Chloris hears." The sonnet pleased Camilla, and
still more Anselmo, for he praised it and said the lady was
excessively cruel who made no return for sincerity so manifest. On
which Camilla said, "Then all that love-smitten poets say is true?"
"As poets they do not tell the truth," replied Lothario; "but as
lovers they are not more defective in expression than they are
truthful." "There is no doubt of that," observed Anselmo, anxious to
support and uphold Lothario's ideas with Camilla, who was as
regardless of his design as she was deep in love with Lothario; and so
taking delight in anything that was his, and knowing that his thoughts
and writings had her for their object, and that she herself was the
real Chloris, she asked him to repeat some other sonnet or verses if
he recollected any. "I do," replied Lothario, "but I do not think it
as good as the first one, or, more correctly speaking, less bad; but
you can easily judge, for it is this. SONNET I know that I am doomed;
death is to me As certain as that thou, ungrateful fair, Dead at thy
feet shouldst see me lying, ere My heart repented of its love for
thee. If buried in oblivion I should be, Bereft of life, fame, favour,
even there It would be found that I thy image bear Deep graven in my
breast for all to see. This like some holy relic do I prize To save me
from the fate my truth entails, Truth that to thy hard heart its
vigour owes. Alas for him that under lowering skies, In peril o'er a
trackless ocean sails, Where neither friendly port nor pole-star
shows." Anselmo praised this second sonnet too, as he had praised the
first; and so he went on adding link after link to the chain with
which he was binding himself and making his dishonour secure; for when
Lothario was doing most to dishonour him he told him he was most
honoured; and thus each step that Camilla descended towards the depths
of her abasement, she mounted, in his opinion, towards the summit of
virtue and fair fame. It so happened that finding herself on one
occasion alone with her maid, Camilla said to her, "I am ashamed to
think, my dear Leonela, how lightly I have valued myself that I did
not compel Lothario to purchase by at least some expenditure of time
that full possession of me that I so quickly yielded him of my own
free will. I fear that he will think ill of my pliancy or lightness,
not considering the irresistible influence he brought to bear upon
me." "Let not that trouble you, my lady," said Leonela, "for it does
not take away the value of the thing given or make it the less
precious to give it quickly if it be really valuable and worthy of
being prized; nay, they are wont to say that he who gives quickly
gives twice." "They say also," said Camilla, "that what costs little
is valued less." "That saying does not hold good in your case,"
replied Leonela, "for love, as I have heard say, sometimes flies and
sometimes walks; with this one it runs, with that it moves slowly;
some it cools, others it burns; some it wounds, others it slays; it
begins the course of its desires, and at the same moment completes and
ends it; in the morning it will lay siege to a fortress and by night
will have taken it, for there is no power that can resist it; so what
are you in dread of, what do you fear, when the same must have
befallen Lothario, love having chosen the absence of my lord as the
instrument for subduing you? and it was absolutely necessary to
complete then what love had resolved upon, without affording the time
to let Anselmo return and by his presence compel the work to be left
unfinished; for love has no better agent for carrying out his designs
than opportunity; and of opportunity he avails himself in all his
feats, especially at the outset. All this I know well myself, more by
experience than by hearsay, and some day, senora, I will enlighten you
on the subject, for I am of your flesh and blood too. Moreover, lady
Camilla, you did not surrender yourself or yield so quickly but that
first you saw Lothario's whole soul in his eyes, in his sighs, in his
words, his promises and his gifts, and by it and his good qualities
perceived how worthy he was of your love. This, then, being the case,
let not these scrupulous and prudish ideas trouble your imagination,
but be assured that Lothario prizes you as you do him, and rest
content and satisfied that as you are caught in the noose of love it
is one of worth and merit that has taken you, and one that has not
only the four S's that they say true lovers ought to have, but a
complete alphabet; only listen to me and you will see how I can repeat
it by rote. He is to my eyes and thinking, Amiable, Brave, Courteous,
Distinguished, Elegant, Fond, Gay, Honourable, Illustrious, Loyal,
Manly, Noble, Open, Polite, Quickwitted, Rich, and the S's according
to the saying, and then Tender, Veracious: X does not suit him, for it
is a rough letter; Y has been given already; and Z Zealous for your
honour." Camilla laughed at her maid's alphabet, and perceived her to
be more experienced in love affairs than she said, which she admitted,
confessing to Camilla that she had love passages with a young man of
good birth of the same city. Camilla was uneasy at this, dreading lest
it might prove the means of endangering her honour, and asked whether
her intrigue had gone beyond words, and she with little shame and much
effrontery said it had; for certain it is that ladies' imprudences
make servants shameless, who, when they see their mistresses make a
false step, think nothing of going astray themselves, or of its being
known. All that Camilla could do was to entreat Leonela to say nothing
about her doings to him whom she called her lover, and to conduct her
own affairs secretly lest they should come to the knowledge of Anselmo
or of Lothario. Leonela said she would, but kept her word in such a
way that she confirmed Camilla's apprehension of losing her reputation
through her means; for this abandoned and bold Leonela, as soon as she
perceived that her mistress's demeanour was not what it was wont to
be, had the audacity to introduce her lover into the house, confident
that even if her mistress saw him she would not dare to expose him;
for the sins of mistresses entail this mischief among others; they
make themselves the slaves of their own servants, and are obliged to
hide their laxities and depravities; as was the case with Camilla, who
though she perceived, not once but many times, that Leonela was with
her lover in some room of the house, not only did not dare to chide
her, but afforded her opportunities for concealing him and removed all
difficulties, lest he should be seen by her husband. She was unable,
however, to prevent him from being seen on one occasion, as he sallied
forth at daybreak, by Lothario, who, not knowing who he was, at first
took him for a spectre; but, as soon as he saw him hasten away,
muffling his face with his cloak and concealing himself carefully and
cautiously, he rejected this foolish idea, and adopted another, which
would have been the ruin of all had not Camilla found a remedy. It did
not occur to Lothario that this man he had seen issuing at such an
untimely hour from Anselmo's house could have entered it on Leonela's
account, nor did he even remember there was such a person as Leonela;
all he thought was that as Camilla had been light and yielding with
him, so she had been with another; for this further penalty the erring
woman's sin brings with it, that her honour is distrusted even by him
to whose overtures and persuasions she has yielded; and he believes
her to have surrendered more easily to others, and gives implicit
credence to every suspicion that comes into his mind. All Lothario's
good sense seems to have failed him at this juncture; all his prudent
maxims escaped his memory; for without once reflecting rationally, and
without more ado, in his impatience and in the blindness of the
jealous rage that gnawed his heart, and dying to revenge himself upon
Camilla, who had done him no wrong, before Anselmo had risen he
hastened to him and said to him, "Know, Anselmo, that for several days
past I have been struggling with myself, striving to withhold from
thee what it is no longer possible or right that I should conceal from
thee. Know that Camilla's fortress has surrendered and is ready to
submit to my will; and if I have been slow to reveal this fact to
thee, it was in order to see if it were some light caprice of hers, or
if she sought to try me and ascertain if the love I began to make to
her with thy permission was made with a serious intention. I thought,
too, that she, if she were what she ought to be, and what we both
believed her, would have ere this given thee information of my
addresses; but seeing that she delays, I believe the truth of the
promise she has given me that the next time thou art absent from the
house she will grant me an interview in the closet where thy jewels
are kept (and it was true that Camilla used to meet him there); but I
do not wish thee to rush precipitately to take vengeance, for the sin
is as yet only committed in intention, and Camilla's may change
perhaps between this and the appointed time, and repentance spring up
in its place. As hitherto thou hast always followed my advice wholly
or in part, follow and observe this that I will give thee now, so
that, without mistake, and with mature deliberation, thou mayest
satisfy thyself as to what may seem the best course; pretend to absent
thyself for two or three days as thou hast been wont to do on other
occasions, and contrive to hide thyself in the closet; for the
tapestries and other things there afford great facilities for thy
concealment, and then thou wilt see with thine own eyes and I with
mine what Camilla's purpose may be. And if it be a guilty one, which
may be feared rather than expected, with silence, prudence, and
discretion thou canst thyself become the instrument of punishment for
the wrong done thee." Anselmo was amazed, overwhelmed, and astounded
at the words of Lothario, which came upon him at a time when he least
expected to hear them, for he now looked upon Camilla as having
triumphed over the pretended attacks of Lothario, and was beginning to
enjoy the glory of her victory. He remained silent for a considerable
time, looking on the ground with fixed gaze, and at length said, "Thou
hast behaved, Lothario, as I expected of thy friendship: I will follow
thy advice in everything; do as thou wilt, and keep this secret as
thou seest it should be kept in circumstances so unlooked for."
Lothario gave him his word, but after leaving him he repented
altogether of what he had said to him, perceiving how foolishly he had
acted, as he might have revenged himself upon Camilla in some less
cruel and degrading way. He cursed his want of sense, condemned his
hasty resolution, and knew not what course to take to undo the
mischief or find some ready escape from it. At last he decided upon
revealing all to Camilla, and, as there was no want of opportunity for
doing so, he found her alone the same day; but she, as soon as she had
the chance of speaking to him, said, "Lothario my friend, I must tell
thee I have a sorrow in my heart which fills it so that it seems ready
to burst; and it will be a wonder if it does not; for the audacity of
Leonela has now reached such a pitch that every night she conceals a
gallant of hers in this house and remains with him till morning, at
the expense of my reputation; inasmuch as it is open to anyone to
question it who may see him quitting my house at such unseasonable
hours; but what distresses me is that I cannot punish or chide her,
for her privity to our intrigue bridles my mouth and keeps me silent
about hers, while I am dreading that some catastrophe will come of
it." As Camilla said this Lothario at first imagined it was some
device to delude him into the idea that the man he had seen going out
was Leonela's lover and not hers; but when he saw how she wept and
suffered, and begged him to help her, he became convinced of the
truth, and the conviction completed his confusion and remorse;
however, he told Camilla not to distress herself, as he would take
measures to put a stop to the insolence of Leonela. At the same time
he told her what, driven by the fierce rage of jealousy, he had said
to Anselmo, and how he had arranged to hide himself in the closet that
he might there see plainly how little she preserved her fidelity to
him; and he entreated her pardon for this madness, and her advice as
to how to repair it, and escape safely from the intricate labyrinth in
which his imprudence had involved him. Camilla was struck with alarm
at hearing what Lothario said, and with much anger, and great good
sense, she reproved him and rebuked his base design and the foolish
and mischievous resolution he had made; but as woman has by nature a
nimbler wit than man for good and for evil, though it is apt to fail
when she sets herself deliberately to reason, Camilla on the spur of
the moment thought of a way to remedy what was to all appearance
irremediable, and told Lothario to contrive that the next day Anselmo
should conceal himself in the place he mentioned, for she hoped from
his concealment to obtain the means of their enjoying themselves for
the future without any apprehension; and without revealing her purpose
to him entirely she charged him to be careful, as soon as Anselmo was
concealed, to come to her when Leonela should call him, and to all she
said to him to answer as he would have answered had he not known that
Anselmo was listening. Lothario pressed her to explain her intention
fully, so that he might with more certainty and precaution take care
to do what he saw to be needful. "I tell you," said Camilla, "there is
nothing to take care of except to answer me what I shall ask you;" for
she did not wish to explain to him beforehand what she meant to do,
fearing lest he should be unwilling to follow out an idea which seemed
to her such a good one, and should try or devise some other less
practicable plan. Lothario then retired, and the next day Anselmo,
under pretence of going to his friend's country house, took his
departure, and then returned to conceal himself, which he was able to
do easily, as Camilla and Leonela took care to give him the
opportunity; and so he placed himself in hiding in the state of
agitation that it may be imagined he would feel who expected to see
the vitals of his honour laid bare before his eyes, and found himself
on the point of losing the supreme blessing he thought he possessed in
his beloved Camilla. Having made sure of Anselmo's being in his
hiding-place, Camilla and Leonela entered the closet, and the instant
she set foot within it Camilla said, with a deep sigh, "Ah! dear
Leonela, would it not be better, before I do what I am unwilling you
should know lest you should seek to prevent it, that you should take
Anselmo's dagger that I have asked of you and with it pierce this vile
heart of mine? But no; there is no reason why I should conceal it from
you, while my servant here is taking off my armour I will tell you the
true state of the case, without leaving out anything. You must know,
senor, that I am called the bachelor Samson Carrasco. I am of the same
village as Don Quixote of La Mancha, whose craze and folly make all of
us who know him feel pity for him, and I am one of those who have felt
it most; and persuaded that his chance of recovery lay in quiet and
keeping at home and in his own house, I hit upon a device for keeping
him there. Three months ago, therefore, I went out to meet him as a
knight-errant, under the assumed name of the Knight of the Mirrors,
intending to engage him in combat and overcome him without hurting
him, making it the condition of our combat that the vanquished should
be at the disposal of the victor. What I meant to demand of him (for I
regarded him as vanquished already) was that he should return to his
own village, and not leave it for a whole year, by which time he might
be cured. But fate ordered it otherwise, for he vanquished me and
unhorsed me, and so my plan failed. He went his way, and I came back
conquered, covered with shame, and sorely bruised by my fall, which
was a particularly dangerous one. But this did not quench my desire to
meet him again and overcome him, as you have seen to-day. And as he is
so scrupulous in his observance of the laws of knight-errantry, he
will, no doubt, in order to keep his word, obey the injunction I have
laid upon him. This, senor, is how the matter stands, and I have
nothing more to tell you. I implore of you not to betray me, or tell
Don Quixote who I am; so that my honest endeavours may be successful,
and that a man of excellent wits--were he only rid of the fooleries of
chivalry--may get them back again." "O senor," said Don Antonio, "may
God forgive you the wrong you have done the whole world in trying to
bring the most amusing madman in it back to his senses. Do you not
see, senor, that the gain by Don Quixote's sanity can never equal the
enjoyment his crazes give? But my belief is that all the senor
bachelor's pains will be of no avail to bring a man so hopelessly
cracked to his senses again; and if it were not uncharitable, I would
say may Don Quixote never be cured, for by his recovery we lose not
only his own drolleries, but his squire Sancho Panza's too, any one of
which is enough to turn melancholy itself into merriment. However,
I'll hold my peace and say nothing to him, and we'll see whether I am
right in my suspicion that Senor Carrasco's efforts will be
fruitless." The bachelor replied that at all events the affair
promised well, and he hoped for a happy result from it; and putting
his services at Don Antonio's commands he took his leave of him; and
having had his armour packed at once upon a mule, he rode away from
the city the same day on the horse he rode to battle, and returned to
his own country without meeting any adventure calling for record in
this veracious history. Don Antonio reported to the viceroy what
Carrasco told him, and the viceroy was not very well pleased to hear
it, for with Don Quixote's retirement there was an end to the
amusement of all who knew anything of his mad doings. Six days did Don
Quixote keep his bed, dejected, melancholy, moody and out of sorts,
brooding over the unhappy event of his defeat. Sancho strove to
comfort him, and among other things he said to him, "Hold up your
head, senor, and be of good cheer if you can, and give thanks to
heaven that if you have had a tumble to the ground you have not come
off with a broken rib; and, as you know that 'where they give they
take,' and that 'there are not always fletches where there are pegs,'
a fig for the doctor, for there's no need of him to cure this ailment.
Let us go home, and give over going about in search of adventures in
strange lands and places; rightly looked at, it is I that am the
greater loser, though it is your worship that has had the worse usage.
With the government I gave up all wish to be a governor again, but I
did not give up all longing to be a count; and that will never come to
pass if your worship gives up becoming a king by renouncing the
calling of chivalry; and so my hopes are going to turn into smoke."
"Peace, Sancho," said Don Quixote; "thou seest my suspension and
retirement is not to exceed a year; I shall soon return to my honoured
calling, and I shall not be at a loss for a kingdom to win and a
county to bestow on thee." "May God hear it and sin be deaf," said
Sancho; "I have always heard say that 'a good hope is better than a
bad holding, and a good grievance better than a bad compensation. I
speak in this way, Sancho, to show you that I can shower down proverbs
just as well as yourself; and in short, I mean to say, and I do say,
that if you don't like to come on reward with me, and run the same
chance that I run, God be with you and make a saint of you; for I
shall find plenty of squires more obedient and painstaking, and not so
thickheaded or talkative as you are." When Sancho heard his master's
firm, resolute language, a cloud came over the sky with him and the
wings of his heart drooped, for he had made sure that his master would
not go without him for all the wealth of the world; and as he stood
there dumbfoundered and moody, Samson Carrasco came in with the
housekeeper and niece, who were anxious to hear by what arguments he
was about to dissuade their master from going to seek adventures. The
arch wag Samson came forward, and embracing him as he had done before,
said with a loud voice, "O flower of knight-errantry! O shining light
of arms! O honour and mirror of the Spanish nation! may God Almighty
in his infinite power grant that any person or persons, who would
impede or hinder thy third sally, may find no way out of the labyrinth
of their schemes, nor ever accomplish what they most desire!" And
then, turning to the housekeeper, he said, "Mistress housekeeper may
just as well give over saying the prayer of Santa Apollonia, for I
know it is the positive determination of the spheres that Senor Don
Quixote shall proceed to put into execution his new and lofty designs;
and I should lay a heavy burden on my conscience did I not urge and
persuade this knight not to keep the might of his strong arm and the
virtue of his valiant spirit any longer curbed and checked, for by his
inactivity he is defrauding the world of the redress of wrongs, of the
protection of orphans, of the honour of virgins, of the aid of widows,
and of the support of wives, and other matters of this kind
appertaining, belonging, proper and peculiar to the order of
knight-errantry. On, then, my lord Don Quixote, beautiful and brave,
let your worship and highness set out to-day rather than to-morrow;
and if anything be needed for the execution of your purpose, here am I
ready in person and purse to supply the want; and were it requisite to
attend your magnificence as squire, I should esteem it the happiest
good fortune." At this, Don Quixote, turning to Sancho, said, "Did I
not tell thee, Sancho, there would be squires enough and to spare for
me? See now who offers to become one; no less than the illustrious
bachelor Samson Carrasco, the perpetual joy and delight of the courts
of the Salamancan schools, sound in body, discreet, patient under heat
or cold, hunger or thirst, with all the qualifications requisite to
make one, showing him sagacious in foreseeing the wiles of the enemy,
eloquent in speech to encourage or restrain his soldiers, ripe in
counsel, rapid in resolve, as bold in biding his time as in pressing
the attack; now picturing some sad tragic incident, now some joyful
and unexpected event; here a beauteous lady, virtuous, wise, and
modest; there a Christian knight, brave and gentle; here a lawless,
barbarous braggart; there a courteous prince, gallant and gracious;
setting forth the devotion and loyalty of vassals, the greatness and
generosity of nobles. "Or again," said he, "the author may show
himself to be an astronomer, or a skilled cosmographer, or musician,
or one versed in affairs of state, and sometimes he will have a chance
of coming forward as a magician if he likes. He can set forth the
craftiness of Ulysses, the piety of AEneas, the valour of Achilles,
the misfortunes of Hector, the treachery of Sinon, the friendship of
Euryalus, the generosity of Alexander, the boldness of Caesar, the
clemency and truth of Trajan, the fidelity of Zopyrus, the wisdom of
Cato, and in short all the faculties that serve to make an illustrious
man perfect, now uniting them in one individual, again distributing
them among many; and if this be done with charm of style and ingenious
invention, aiming at the truth as much as possible, he will assuredly
weave a web of bright and varied threads that, when finished, will
display such perfection and beauty that it will attain the worthiest
object any writing can seek, which, as I said before, is to give
instruction and pleasure combined; for the unrestricted range of these
books enables the author to show his powers, epic, lyric, tragic, or
comic, and all the moods the sweet and winning arts of poesy and
oratory are capable of; for the epic may be written in prose just as
well as in verse." CHAPTER XLVIII. IN WHICH THE CANON PURSUES THE
SUBJECT OF THE BOOKS OF CHIVALRY, WITH OTHER MATTERS WORTHY OF HIS WIT
"It is as you say, senor canon," said the curate; "and for that reason
those who have hitherto written books of the sort deserve all the more
censure for writing without paying any attention to good taste or the
rules of art, by which they might guide themselves and become as
famous in prose as the two princes of Greek and Latin poetry are in
verse." "I myself, at any rate," said the canon, "was once tempted to
write a book of chivalry in which all the points I have mentioned were
to be observed; and if I must own the truth I have more than a hundred
sheets written; and to try if it came up to my own opinion of it, I
showed them to persons who were fond of this kind of reading, to
learned and intelligent men as well as to ignorant people who cared
for nothing but the pleasure of listening to nonsense, and from all I
obtained flattering approval; nevertheless I proceeded no farther with
it, as well because it seemed to me an occupation inconsistent with my
profession, as because I perceived that the fools are more numerous
than the wise; and, though it is better to be praised by the wise few
than applauded by the foolish many, I have no mind to submit myself to
the stupid judgment of the silly public, to whom the reading of such
books falls for the most part. "But what most of all made me hold my
hand and even abandon all idea of finishing it was an argument I put
to myself taken from the plays that are acted now-a-days, which was in
this wise: if those that are now in vogue, as well those that are pure
invention as those founded on history, are, all or most of them,
downright nonsense and things that have neither head nor tail, like
that affair of the answer to the letter, and that other of six or
eight days ago, which is not yet in history, that is to say, the
affair of the enchantment of my lady Dulcinea; for I made him believe
she is enchanted, though there's no more truth in it than over the
hills of Ubeda." The duchess begged him to tell her about the
enchantment or deception, so Sancho told the whole story exactly as it
had happened, and his hearers were not a little amused by it; and then
resuming, the duchess said, "In consequence of what worthy Sancho has
told me, a doubt starts up in my mind, and there comes a kind of
whisper to my ear that says, 'If Don Quixote be mad, crazy, and
cracked, and Sancho Panza his squire knows it, and, notwithstanding,
serves and follows him, and goes trusting to his empty promises, there
can be no doubt he must be still madder and sillier than his master;
and that being so, it will be cast in your teeth, senora duchess, if
you give the said Sancho an island to govern; for how will he who does
not know how to govern himself know how to govern others?'" "By God,
senora," said Sancho, "but that doubt comes timely; but your grace may
say it out, and speak plainly, or as you like; for I know what you say
is true, and if I were wise I should have left my master long ago; but
this was my fate, this was my bad luck; I can't help it, I must follow
him; we're from the same village, I've eaten his bread, I'm fond of
him, I'm grateful, he gave me his ass-colts, and above all I'm
faithful; so it's quite impossible for anything to separate us, except
the pickaxe and shovel. And if your highness does not like to give me
the government you promised, God made me without it, and maybe your
not giving it to me will be all the better for my conscience, for fool
as I am I know the proverb 'to her hurt the ant got wings,' and it may
be that Sancho the squire will get to heaven sooner than Sancho the
governor. 'They make as good bread here as in France,' and 'by night
all cats are grey,' and 'a hard case enough his, who hasn't broken his
fast at two in the afternoon,' and 'there's no stomach a hand's
breadth bigger than another,' and the same can be filled 'with straw
or hay,' as the saying is, and 'the little birds of the field have God
for their purveyor and caterer,' and 'four yards of Cuenca frieze keep
one warmer than four of Segovia broad-cloth,' and 'when we quit this
world and are put underground the prince travels by as narrow a path
as the journeyman,' and 'the Pope's body does not take up more feet of
earth than the sacristan's,' for all that the one is higher than the
other; for when we go to our graves we all pack ourselves up and make
ourselves small, or rather they pack us up and make us small in spite
of us, and then--good night to us. And I say once more, if your
ladyship does not like to give me the government you promised, God
made me without it, and maybe your not giving it to me will be all the
better for my conscience, for fool as I am I know the proverb 'to her
hurt the ant got wings,' and it may be that Sancho the squire will get
to heaven sooner than Sancho the governor. 'They make as good bread
here as in France,' and 'by night all cats are grey,' and 'a hard case
enough his, who hasn't broken his fast at two in the afternoon,' and
'there's no stomach a hand's breadth bigger than another,' and the
same can be filled 'with straw or hay,' as the saying is, and 'the
little birds of the field have God for their purveyor and caterer,'
and 'four yards of Cuenca frieze keep one warmer than four of Segovia
broad-cloth,' and 'when we quit this world and are put underground the
prince travels by as narrow a path as the journeyman,' and 'the Pope's
body does not take up more feet of earth than the sacristan's,' for
all that the one is higher than the other; for when we go to our
graves we all pack ourselves up and make ourselves small, or rather
they pack us up and make us small in spite of us, and then--good night
to us. And I say once more, if your ladyship does not like to give me
the island because I'm a fool, like a wise man I will take care to
give myself no trouble about it; I have heard say that 'behind the
cross there's the devil,' and that 'all that glitters is not gold,'
and that from among the oxen, and the ploughs, and the yokes, Wamba
the husbandman was taken to be made King of Spain, and from among
brocades, and pleasures, and riches, Roderick was taken to be devoured
by adders, if the verses of the old ballads don't lie." "To be sure
they don't lie!" exclaimed Dona Rodriguez, the duenna, who was one of
the listeners. "Why, there's a ballad that says they put King Rodrigo
alive into a tomb full of toads, and adders, and lizards, and that two
days afterwards the king, in a plaintive, feeble voice, cried out from
within the tomb-- They gnaw me now, they gnaw me now, There where I
most did sin. And according to that the gentleman has good reason to
say he would rather be a labouring man than a king, if vermin are to
eat him." The duchess could not help laughing at the simplicity of her
duenna, or wondering at the language and proverbs of Sancho, to whom
she said, "Worthy Sancho knows very well that when once a knight has
made a promise he strives to keep it, though it should cost him his
life. But now Don Fernando's friends, as well as the curate and the
barber, who had been present all the while, not forgetting the worthy
Sancho Panza, ran forward and gathered round Don Fernando, entreating
him to have regard for the tears of Dorothea, and not suffer her
reasonable hopes to be disappointed, since, as they firmly believed,
what she said was but the truth; and bidding him observe that it was
not, as it might seem, by accident, but by a special disposition of
Providence that they had all met in a place where no one could have
expected a meeting. And the curate bade him remember that only death
could part Luscinda from Cardenio; that even if some sword were to
separate them they would think their death most happy; and that in a
case that admitted of no remedy his wisest course was, by conquering
and putting a constraint upon himself, to show a generous mind, and of
his own accord suffer these two to enjoy the happiness Heaven had
granted them. He bade him, too, turn his eyes upon the beauty of
Dorothea and he would see that few if any could equal much less excel
her; while to that beauty should be added her modesty and the
surpassing love she bore him. But besides all this, he reminded him
that if he prided himself on being a gentleman and a Christian, he
could not do otherwise than keep his plighted word; and that in doing
so he would obey God and meet the approval of all sensible people, who
know and recognised it to be the privilege of beauty, even in one of
humble birth, provided virtue accompany it, to be able to raise itself
to the level of any rank, without any slur upon him who places it upon
an equality with himself; and furthermore that when the potent sway of
passion asserts itself, so long as there be no mixture of sin in it,
he is not to be blamed who gives way to it. To be brief, they added to
these such other forcible arguments that Don Fernando's manly heart,
being after all nourished by noble blood, was touched, and yielded to
the truth which, even had he wished it, he could not gainsay; and he
showed his submission, and acceptance of the good advice that had been
offered to him, by stooping down and embracing Dorothea, saying to
her, "Rise, dear lady, it is not right that what I hold in my heart
should be kneeling at my feet; and if until now I have shown no sign
of what I own, it may have been by Heaven's decree in order that,
seeing the constancy with which you love me, I may learn to value you
as you deserve. What I entreat of you is that you reproach me not with
my transgression and grievous wrong-doing; for the same cause and
force that drove me to make you mine impelled me to struggle against
being yours; and to prove this, turn and look at the eyes of the now
happy Luscinda, and you will see in them an excuse for all my errors:
and as she has found and gained the object of her desires, and I have
found in you what satisfies all my wishes, may she live in peace and
contentment as many happy years with her Cardenio, as on my knees I
pray Heaven to allow me to live with my Dorothea;" and with these
words he once more embraced her and pressed his face to hers with so
much tenderness that he had to take great heed to keep his tears from
completing the proof of his love and repentance in the sight of all.
Not so Luscinda, and Cardenio, and almost all the others, for they
shed so many tears, some in their own happiness, some at that of the
others, that one would have supposed a heavy calamity had fallen upon
them all. Even Sancho Panza was weeping; though afterwards he said he
only wept because he saw that Dorothea was not as he fancied the queen
Micomicona, of whom he expected such great favours. Their wonder as
well as their weeping lasted some time, and then Cardenio and Luscinda
went and fell on their knees before Don Fernando, returning him thanks
for the favour he had rendered them in language so grateful that he
knew not how to answer them, and raising them up embraced them with
every mark of affection and courtesy. He then asked Dorothea how she
had managed to reach a place so far removed from her own home, and she
in a few fitting words told all that she had previously related to
Cardenio, with which Don Fernando and his companions were so delighted
that they wished the story had been longer; so charmingly did Dorothea
describe her misadventures. When she had finished Don Fernando
recounted what had befallen him in the city after he had found in
Luscinda's bosom the paper in which she declared that she was
Cardenio's wife, and never could be his. He said he meant to kill her,
and would have done so had not Sancho interposed with his smartness;
for he, seeing his master pause, took the lead, saying, "My lord Don
Quixote of La Mancha, who once was called the Knight of the Rueful
Countenance, but now is called the Knight of the Lions, is a gentleman
of great discretion who knows Latin and his mother tongue like a
bachelor, and in everything that he deals with or advises proceeds
like a good soldier, and has all the laws and ordinances of what they
call combat at his fingers' ends; so you have nothing to do but to
turn aside out of the somewhat narrow path of poetry and take the
still narrower one of knight-errantry, wide enough, however, to make
you an emperor in the twinkling of an eye." In this speech Don Quixote
wound up the evidence of his madness, but still better in what he
added when he said, "God knows, I would gladly take Don Lorenzo with
me to teach him how to spare the humble, and trample the proud under
foot, virtues that are part and parcel of the profession I belong to;
but since his tender age does not allow of it, nor his praiseworthy
pursuits permit it, I will simply content myself with impressing it
upon your worship that you will become famous as a poet if you are
guided by the opinion of others rather than by your own; because no
fathers or mothers ever think their own children ill-favoured, and
this sort of deception prevails still more strongly in the case of the
children of the brain." Both father and son were amazed afresh at the
strange medley Don Quixote talked, at one moment sense, at another
nonsense, and at the pertinacity and persistence he displayed in going
through thick and thin in quest of his unlucky adventures, which he
made the end and aim of his desires. There was a renewal of offers of
service and civilities, and then, with the gracious permission of the
lady of the castle, they took their departure, Don Quixote on
Rocinante, and Sancho on Dapple. CHAPTER XIX. IN WHICH IS RELATED THE
ADVENTURE OF THE ENAMOURED SHEPHERD, TOGETHER WITH OTHER TRULY DROLL
INCIDENTS CHAPTER XX WHEREIN AN ACCOUNT IS GIVEN OF THE WEDDING OF
CAMACHO THE RICH, TOGETHER WITH THE INCIDENT OF BASILIO THE POOR
CHAPTER XXI IN WHICH CAMACHO'S WEDDING IS CONTINUED, WITH OTHER
DELIGHTFUL INCIDENTS CHAPTER XXII WHERIN IS RELATED THE GRAND
ADVENTURE OF THE CAVE OF MONTESINOS IN THE HEART OF LA MANCHA, WHICH
THE VALIANT DON QUIXOTE BROUGHT TO A HAPPY TERMINATION CHAPTER XXIII
OF THE WONDERFUL THINGS THE INCOMPARABLE DON QUIXOTE SAID HE SAW IN
THE PROFOUND CAVE OF MONTESINOS, THE IMPOSSIBILITY AND MAGNITUDE OF
WHICH CAUSE THIS ADVENTURE TO BE DEEMED APOCRYPHAL CHAPTER XXIV
WHEREIN ARE RELATED A THOUSAND TRIFLING MATTERS, AS TRIVIAL AS THEY
ARE NECESSARY TO THE RIGHT UNDERSTANDING OF THIS GREAT HISTORY He who
translated this great history from the original written by its first
author, Cide Hamete Benengeli, says that on coming to the chapter
giving the adventures of the cave of Montesinos he found written on
the margin of it, in Hamete's own hand, these exact words: "I cannot
convince or persuade myself that everything that is written in the
preceding chapter could have precisely happened to the valiant Don
Quixote; and for this reason, that all the adventures that have
occurred up to the present have been possible and probable; but as for
this one of the cave, I see no way of accepting it as true, as it
passes all reasonable bounds. For me to believe that Don Quixote could
lie, he being the most truthful gentleman and the noblest knight of
his time, is impossible; he would not have told a lie though he were
shot to death with arrows. On the other hand, I reflect that he
related and told the story with all the circumstances detailed, and
that he could not in so short a space have fabricated such a vast
complication of absurdities; if, then, this adventure seems
apocryphal, it is no fault of mine; and so, without affirming its
falsehood or its truth, I write it down. Decide for thyself in thy
wisdom, reader; for I am not bound, nor is it in my power, to do more;
though certain it is they say that at the time of his death he
retracted, and said he had invented it, thinking it matched and
tallied with the adventures he had read of in his histories." And then
he goes on to say: The cousin was amazed as well at Sancho's boldness
as at the patience of his master, and concluded that the good temper
the latter displayed arose from the happiness he felt at having seen
his lady Dulcinea, even enchanted as she was; because otherwise the
words and language Sancho had addressed to him deserved a thrashing;
for indeed he seemed to him to have been rather impudent to his
master, to whom he now observed, "I, Senor Don Quixote of La Mancha,
look upon the time I have spent in travelling with your worship as
very well employed, for I have gained four things in the course of it;
the first is that I have made your acquaintance, which I consider
great good fortune; the second, that I have learned what the cave of
Montesinos contains, together with the transformations of Guadiana and
of the lakes of Ruidera; which will be of use to me for the Spanish
Ovid that I have in hand; the third, to have discovered the antiquity
of cards, that they were in use at least in the time of Charlemagne,
as may be inferred from the words you say Durandarte uttered when, at
the end of that long spell while Montesinos was talking to him, he
woke up and said, 'Patience and shuffle.' This phrase and expression
he could not have learned while he was enchanted, but only before he
had become so, in France, and in the time of the aforesaid emperor
Charlemagne. And this demonstration is just the thing for me for that
other book I am writing, the 'Supplement to Polydore Vergil on the
Invention of Antiquities;' for I believe he never thought of inserting
that of cards in his book, as I mean to do in mine, and it will be a
matter of great importance, particularly when I can cite so grave and
veracious an authority as Senor Durandarte. And the fourth thing is,
that I have ascertained the source of the river Guadiana, heretofore
unknown to mankind." "You are right," said Don Quixote; "but I should
like to know, if by God's favour they grant you a licence to print
those books of yours-which I doubt--to whom do you mean dedicate
them?" "There are lords and grandees in Spain to whom they can be
dedicated," said the cousin. "Not many," said Don Quixote; "not that
they are unworthy of it, but because they do not care to accept books
and incur the obligation of making the return that seems due to the
author's labour and courtesy. One prince I know who makes up for all
the rest, and more-how much more, if I ventured to say, perhaps I
should stir up envy in many a noble breast; but let this stand over
for some more convenient time, and let us go and look for some place
to shelter ourselves in to-night." "Not far from this," said the
cousin, "there is a hermitage, where there lives a hermit, who they
say was a soldier, and who has the reputation of being a good
Christian and a very intelligent and charitable man. Close to the
hermitage he has a small house which he built at his own cost, but
though small it is large enough for the reception of guests." "Has
this hermit any hens, do you think?" asked Sancho. "Few hermits are
without them," said Don Quixote; "for those we see now-a-days are not
like the hermits of the Egyptian deserts who were clad in palm-leaves,
and lived on the roots of the earth. But do not think that by praising
these I am disparaging the others; all I mean to say is that the
penances of those of the present day do not come up to the asceticism
and austerity of former times; but it does not follow from this that
they are not all worthy; at least I think them so; and at the worst
the hypocrite who pretends to be good does less harm than the open
sinner." At this point they saw approaching the spot where they stood
a man on foot, proceeding at a rapid pace, and beating a mule loaded
with lances and halberds. When he came up to them, he saluted them and
passed on without stopping. Don Quixote called to him, "Stay, good
fellow; you seem to be making more haste than suits that mule." "I
cannot stop, senor," answered the man; "for the arms you see I carry
here are to be used tomorrow, so I must not delay; God be with you.
But if you want to know what I am carrying them for, I mean to lodge
to-night at the inn that is beyond the hermitage, and if you be going
the same road you will find me there, and I will tell you some curious
things; once more God be with you;" and he urged on his mule at such a
pace that Don Quixote had no time to ask him what these curious things
were that he meant to tell them; and as he was somewhat inquisitive,
and always tortured by his anxiety to learn something new, he decided
to set out at once, and go and pass the night at the inn instead of
stopping at the hermitage, where the cousin would have had them halt.
Accordingly they mounted and all three took the direct road for the
inn, which they reached a little before nightfall. On the road the
cousin proposed they should go up to the hermitage to drink a sup. The
instant Sancho heard this he steered his Dapple towards it, and Don
Quixote and the cousin did the same; but it seems Sancho's bad luck so
ordered it that the hermit was not at home, for so a sub-hermit they
found in the hermitage told them. They called for some of the best.
She replied that her master had none, but that if they liked cheap
water she would give it with great pleasure. "If I found any in
water," said Sancho, "there are wells along the road where I could
have had enough of it. Ah, Camacho's wedding, and plentiful house of
Don Diego, how often do I miss you!" Leaving the hermitage, they
pushed on towards the inn, and a little farther they came upon a youth
who was pacing along in front of them at no great speed, so that they
overtook him. He carried a sword over his shoulder, and slung on it a
budget or bundle of his clothes apparently, probably his breeches or
pantaloons, and his cloak and a shirt or two; for he had on a short
jacket of velvet with a gloss like satin on it in places, and had his
shirt out; his stockings were of silk, and his shoes square-toed as
they wear them at court. His age might have been eighteen or nineteen;
he was of a merry countenance, and to all appearance of an active
habit, and he went along singing seguidillas to beguile the
wearisomeness of the road. As they came up with him he was just
finishing one, which the cousin got by heart and they say ran thus--
I'm off to the wars For the want of pence, Oh, had I but money I'd
show more sense. The first to address him was Don Quixote, who said,
"You travel very airily, sir gallant; whither bound, may we ask, if it
is your pleasure to tell us?" To which the youth replied, "The heat
and my poverty are the reason of my travelling so airily, and it is to
the wars that I am bound." "How poverty?" asked Don Quixote; "the heat
one can understand." "Senor," replied the youth, "in this bundle I
carry velvet pantaloons to match this jacket; if I wear them out on
the road, I shall not be able to make a decent appearance in them in
the city, and I have not the wherewithal to buy others; and so for
this reason, as well as to keep myself cool, I am making my way in
this fashion to overtake some companies of infantry that are not
twelve leagues off, in which I shall enlist, and there will be no want
of baggage trains to travel with after that to the place of
embarkation, which they say will be Carthagena; I would rather have
the King for a master, and serve him in the wars, than serve a court
pauper." "And did you get any bounty, now?" asked the cousin. "If I
had been in the service of some grandee of Spain or personage of
distinction," replied the youth, "I should have been safe to get it;
for that is the advantage of serving good masters, that out of the
servants' hall men come to be ancients or captains, or get a good
pension. But I, to my misfortune, always served place-hunters and
adventurers, whose keep and wages were so miserable and scanty that
half went in paying for the starching of one's collars; it would be a
miracle indeed if a page volunteer ever got anything like a reasonable
bounty." "And tell me, for heaven's sake," asked Don Quixote, "is it
possible, my friend, that all the time you served you never got any
livery?" "They gave me two," replied the page; "but just as when one
quits a religious community before making profession, they strip him
of the dress of the order and give him back his own clothes, so did my
masters return me mine; for as soon as the business on which they came
to court was finished, they went home and took back the liveries they
had given merely for show." "What spilorceria!--as an Italian would
say," said Don Quixote; "but for all that, consider yourself happy in
having left court with as worthy an object as you have, for there is
nothing on earth more honourable or profitable than serving, first of
all God, and then one's king and natural lord, particularly in the
profession of arms, by which, if not more wealth, at least more honour
is to be won than by letters, as I have said many a time; for though
letters may have founded more great houses than arms, still those
founded by arms have I know not what superiority over those founded by
letters, and a certain splendour belonging to them that distinguishes
them above all. And bear in mind what I am now about to say to you,
for it will be of great use and comfort to you in time of trouble; it
is, not to let your mind dwell on the adverse chances that may befall
you; for the worst of all is death, and if it be a good death, the
best of all is to die. They asked Julius Caesar, the valiant Roman
emperor, what was the best death. He answered, that which is
unexpected, which comes suddenly and unforeseen; and though he
answered like a pagan, and one without the knowledge of the true God,
yet, as far as sparing our feelings is concerned, he was right; for
suppose you are killed in the first engagement or skirmish, whether by
a cannon ball or blown up by mine, what matters it? It is only dying,
and all is over; and according to Terence, a soldier shows better dead
in battle, than alive and safe in flight; and the good soldier wins
fame in proportion as he is obedient to his captains and those in
command over him. And remember, my son, that it is better for the
soldier to smell of gunpowder than of civet, and that if old age
should come upon you in this honourable calling, though you may be
covered with wounds and crippled and lame, it will not come upon you
without honour, and that such as poverty cannot lessen; especially now
that provisions are being made for supporting and relieving old and
disabled soldiers; for it is not right to deal with them after the
fashion of those who set free and get rid of their black slaves when
they are old and useless, and, turning them out of their houses under
the pretence of making them free, make them slaves to hunger, from
which they cannot expect to be released except by death. But for the
present I won't say more than get ye up behind me on my horse as far
as the inn, and sup with me there, and to-morrow you shall pursue your
journey, and God give you as good speed as your intentions deserve."
The page did not accept the invitation to mount, though he did that to
supper at the inn; and here they say Sancho said to himself, "God be
with you for a master; is it possible that a man who can say things so
many and so good as he has said just now, can say that he saw the
impossible absurdities he reports about the cave of Montesinos? Well,
well, we shall see." And now, just as night was falling, they reached
the inn, and it was not without satisfaction that Sancho perceived his
master took it for a real inn, and not for a castle as usual. The
instant they entered Don Quixote asked the landlord after the man with
the lances and halberds, and was told that he was in the stable seeing
to his mule; which was what Sancho and the cousin proceeded to do for
their beasts, giving the best manger and the best place in the stable
to Rocinante. CHAPTER XXV. WHEREIN IS SET DOWN THE BRAYING ADVENTURE,
AND THE DROLL ONE OF THE PUPPET-SHOWMAN, TOGETHER WITH THE MEMORABLE
DIVINATIONS OF THE DIVINING APE Don Quixote's bread would not bake, as
the common saying is, until he had heard and learned the curious
things promised by the man who carried the arms. He went to seek him
where the innkeeper said he was and having found him, bade him say now
at any rate what he had to say in answer to the woman's charge. He all
in confusion made answer, "Sirs, I am a poor pig dealer, and this
morning I left the village to sell (saving your presence) four pigs,
and between dues and cribbings they got out of me little less than the
worth of them. As I was returning to my village I fell in on the road
with this good dame, and the devil who makes a coil and a mess out of
everything, yoked us together. I paid her fairly, but she not
contented laid hold of me and never let go until she brought me here;
she says I forced her, but she lies by the oath I swear or am ready to
swear; and this is the whole truth and every particle of it." The
governor on this asked him if he had any money in silver about him; he
said he had about twenty ducats in a leather purse in his bosom. The
governor bade him take it out and hand it to the complainant; he
obeyed trembling; the woman took it, and making a thousand salaams to
all and praying to God for the long life and health of the senor
governor who had such regard for distressed orphans and virgins, she
hurried out of court with the purse grasped in both her hands, first
looking, however, to see if the money it contained was silver. As soon
as she was gone Sancho said to the cattle dealer, whose tears were
already starting and whose eyes and heart were following his purse,
"Good fellow, go after that woman and take the purse from her, by
force even, and come back with it here;" and he did not say it to one
who was a fool or deaf, for the man was off like a flash of lightning,
and ran to do as he was bid. All the bystanders waited anxiously to
see the end of the case, and presently both man and woman came back at
even closer grips than before, she with her petticoat up and the purse
in the lap of it, and he struggling hard to take it from her, but all
to no purpose, so stout was the woman's defence, she all the while
crying out, "Justice from God and the world! see here, senor governor,
the shamelessness and boldness of this villain, who in the middle of
the town, in the middle of the street, wanted to take from me the
purse your worship bade him give me." "And did he take it?" asked the
governor. "Take it!" said the woman; "I'd let my life be taken from me
sooner than the purse. A pretty child I'd be! It's another sort of cat
they must throw in my face, and not that poor scurvy knave. Pincers
and hammers, mallets and chisels would not get it out of my grip; no,
nor lions' claws; the soul from out of my body first!" "She is right,"
said the man; "I own myself beaten and powerless; I confess I haven't
the strength to take it from her;" and he let go his hold of her. Upon
this the governor said to the woman, "Let me see that purse, my worthy
and sturdy friend." She handed it to him at once, and the governor
returned it to the man, and said to the unforced mistress of force,
"Sister, if you had shown as much, or only half as much, spirit and
vigour in defending your body as you have shown in defending that
purse, the strength of Hercules could not have forced you. Be off, and
God speed you, and bad luck to you, and don't show your face in all
this island, or within six leagues of it on any side, under pain of
two hundred lashes; be off at once, I say, you shameless, cheating
shrew." The woman was cowed and went off disconsolately, hanging her
head; and the governor said to the man, "Honest man, go home with your
money, and God speed you; and for the future, if you don't want to
lose it, see that you don't take it into your head to yoke with
anybody." The man thanked him as clumsily as he could and went his
way, and the bystanders were again filled with admiration at their new
governor's judgments and sentences. Next, two men, one apparently a
farm labourer, and the other a tailor, for he had a pair of shears in
his hand, presented themselves before him, and the tailor said, "Senor
governor, this labourer and I come before your worship by reason of
this honest man coming to my shop yesterday (for saving everybody's
presence I'm a passed tailor, God be thanked), and putting a piece of
cloth into my hands and asking me, 'Senor, will there be enough in
this cloth to make me a cap?' Measuring the cloth I said there would.
He probably suspected--as I supposed, and I supposed right--that I
wanted to steal some of the cloth, led to think so by his own roguery
and the bad opinion people have of tailors; and he told me to see if
there would be enough for two. I guessed what he would be at, and I
said 'yes.' He, still following up his original unworthy notion, went
on adding cap after cap, and I 'yes' after 'yes,' until we got as far
as five. He has just this moment come for them; I gave them to him,
but he won't pay me for the making; on the contrary, he calls upon me
to pay him, or else return his cloth." "Is all this true, brother?"
said Sancho. "Yes," replied the man; "but will your worship make him
show the five caps he has made me?" "With all my heart," said the
tailor; and drawing his hand from under his cloak he showed five caps
stuck upon the five fingers of it, and said, "there are the caps this
good man asks for; and by God and upon my conscience I haven't a scrap
of cloth left, and I'll let the work be examined by the inspectors of
the trade." All present laughed at the number of caps and the novelty
of the suit; Sancho set himself to think for a moment, and then said,
"It seems to me that in this case it is not necessary to deliver
long-winded arguments, but only to give off-hand the judgment of an
honest man; and so my decision is that the tailor lose the making and
the labourer the cloth, and that the caps go to the prisoners in the
gaol, and let there be no more about it." If the previous decision
about the cattle dealer's purse excited the admiration of the
bystanders, this provoked their laughter; however, the governor's
orders were after all executed. All this, having been taken down by
his chronicler, was at once despatched to the duke, who was looking
out for it with great eagerness; and here let us leave the good
Sancho; for his master, sorely troubled in mind by Altisidora's music,
has pressing claims upon us now. CHAPTER XLVI. OF THE TERRIBLE BELL
AND CAT FRIGHT THAT DON QUIXOTE GOT IN THE COURSE OF THE ENAMOURED
ALTISIDORA'S WOOING CHAPTER XLVII WHEREIN IS CONTINUED THE ACCOUNT OF
HOW SANCHO PANZA CONDUCTED HIMSELF IN HIS GOVERNMENT CHAPTER XLVIII OF
WHAT BEFELL DON QUIXOTE WITH DONA RODRIGUEZ, THE DUCHESS'S DUENNA,
TOGETHER WITH OTHER OCCURRENCES WORTHY OF RECORD AND ETERNAL
REMEMBRANCE CHAPTER XLIX OF WHAT HAPPENED SANCHO IN MAKING THE ROUND
OF HIS ISLAND CHAPTER L WHEREIN IS SET FORTH WHO THE ENCHANTERS AND
EXECUTIONERS WERE WHO FLOGGED THE DUENNA AND PINCHED DON QUIXOTE, AND
ALSO WHAT BEFELL THE PAGE WHO CARRIED THE LETTER TO TERESA PANZA,
SANCHO PANZA'S WIFE Cide Hamete, the painstaking investigator of the
minute points of this veracious history, says that when Dona Rodriguez
left her own room to go to Don Quixote's, another duenna who slept
with her observed her, and as all duennas are fond of prying,
listening, and sniffing, she followed her so silently that the good
Rodriguez never perceived it; and as soon as the duenna saw her enter
Don Quixote's room, not to fail in a duenna's invariable practice of
tattling, she hurried off that instant to report to the duchess how
Dona Rodriguez was closeted with Don Quixote. The duchess told the
duke, and asked him to let her and Altisidora go and see what the said
duenna wanted with Don Quixote. The duke gave them leave, and the pair
cautiously and quietly crept to the door of the room and posted
themselves so close to it that they could hear all that was said
inside. But when the duchess heard how the Rodriguez had made public
the Aranjuez of her issues she could not restrain herself, nor
Altisidora either; and so, filled with rage and thirsting for
vengeance, they burst into the room and tormented Don Quixote and
flogged the duenna in the manner already described; for indignities
offered to their charms and self-esteem mightily provoke the anger of
women and make them eager for revenge. The duchess told the duke what
had happened, and he was much amused by it; and she, in pursuance of
her design of making merry and diverting herself with Don Quixote,
despatched the page who had played the part of Dulcinea in the
negotiations for her disenchantment (which Sancho Panza in the cares
of government had forgotten all about) to Teresa Panza his wife with
her husband's letter and another from herself, and also a great string
of fine coral beads as a present. Now the history says this page was
very sharp and quick-witted; and eager to serve his lord and lady he
set off very willingly for Sancho's village. Before he entered it he
observed a number of women washing in a brook, and asked them if they
could tell him whether there lived there a woman of the name of Teresa
Panza, wife of one Sancho Panza, squire to a knight called Don Quixote
of La Mancha. At the question a young girl who was washing stood up
and said, "Teresa Panza is my mother, and that Sancho is my father,
and that knight is our master." "Well then, miss," said the page,
"come and show me where your mother is, for I bring her a letter and a
present from your father." "That I will with all my heart, senor,"
said the girl, who seemed to be about fourteen, more or less; and
leaving the clothes she was washing to one of her companions, and
without putting anything on her head or feet, for she was bare-legged
and had her hair hanging about her, away she skipped in front of the
page's horse, saying, "Come, your worship, our house is at the
entrance of the town, and my mother is there, sorrowful enough at not
having had any news of my father this ever so long." "Well," said the
page, "I am bringing her such good news that she will have reason to
thank God." And then, skipping, running, and capering, the girl
reached the town, but before going into the house she called out at
the door, "Come out, mother Teresa, come out, come out; here's a
gentleman with letters and other things from my good father." At these
words her mother Teresa Panza came out spinning a bundle of flax, in a
grey petticoat (so short was it one would have fancied "they to her
shame had cut it short"), a grey bodice of the same stuff, and a
smock. She was not very old, though plainly past forty, strong,
healthy, vigorous, and sun-dried; and seeing her daughter and the page
on horseback, she exclaimed, "What's this, child? What gentleman is
this?" "A servant of my lady, Dona Teresa Panza," replied the page;
and suiting the action to the word he flung himself off his horse, and
with great humility advanced to kneel before the lady Teresa, saying,
"Let me kiss your hand, Senora Dona Teresa, as the lawful and only
wife of Senor Don Sancho Panza, rightful governor of the island of
Barataria." "Ah, senor, get up, do that," said Teresa; "for I'm not a
bit of a court lady, but only a poor country woman, the daughter of a
clodcrusher, and the wife of a squire-errant and not of any governor
at all." "You are," said the page, "the most worthy wife of a most
arch-worthy governor; and as a proof of what I say accept this letter
and this present;" and at the same time he took out of his pocket a
string of coral beads with gold clasps; I wish they were Oriental
pearls; but "he who gives thee a bone does not wish to see thee dead;"
a time will come when we shall become acquainted and meet one another,
but God knows the future. Commend me to your daughter Sanchica, and
tell her from me to hold herself in readiness, for I mean to make a
high match for her when she least expects it. They tell me there are
big acorns in your village; send me a couple of dozen or so, and I
shall value them greatly as coming from your hand; and write to me at
length to assure me of your health and well-being; and if there be
anything you stand in need of, it is but to open your mouth, and that
shall be the measure; and so God keep you. From this place. Your
loving friend, THE DUCHESS. "Ah, what a good, plain, lowly lady!" said
Teresa when she heard the letter; "that I may be buried with ladies of
that sort, and not the gentlewomen we have in this town, that fancy
because they are gentlewomen the wind must not touch them, and go to
church with as much airs as if they were queens, no less, and seem to
think they are disgraced if they look at a farmer's wife! And see here
how this good lady, for all she's a duchess, calls me 'friend,' and
treats me as if I was her equal--and equal may I see her with the
tallest church-tower in La Mancha! And as for the acorns, senor, I'll
send her ladyship a peck and such big ones that one might come to see
them as a show and a wonder. And now, Sanchica, see that the gentleman
is comfortable; put up his horse, and get some eggs out of the stable,
and cut plenty of bacon, and let's give him his dinner like a prince;
for the good news he has brought, and his own bonny face deserve it
all; and meanwhile I'll run out and give the neighbours the news of
our good luck, and father curate, and Master Nicholas the barber, who
are and always have been such friends of thy father's." "That I will,
mother," said Sanchica; "but mind, you must give me half of that
string; for I don't think my lady the duchess could have been so
stupid as to send it all to you." "It is all for thee, my child," said
Teresa; "but let me wear it round my neck for a few days; for verily
it seems to make my heart glad." "You will be glad too," said the
page, "when you see the bundle there is in this portmanteau, for it is
a suit of the finest cloth, that the governor only wore one day out
hunting and now sends, all for Senora Sanchica." "May he live a
thousand years," said Sanchica, "and the bearer as many, nay two
thousand, if needful." With this Teresa hurried out of the house with
the letters, and with the string of beads round her neck, and went
along thrumming the letters as if they were a tambourine, and by
chance coming across the curate and Samson Carrasco she began capering
and saying, "None of us poor now, faith! We've got a little
government! Ay, let the finest fine lady tackle me, and I'll give her
a setting down!" "What's all this, Teresa Panza," said they; "what
madness is this, and what papers are those?" "The madness is only
this," said she, "that these are the letters of duchesses and
governors, and these I have on my neck are fine coral beads, with
ave-marias and paternosters of beaten gold, and I am a governess."
"God help us," said the curate, "we don't understand you, Teresa, or
know what you are talking about." "There, you may see it yourselves,"
said Teresa, and she handed them the letters. The curate read them out
for Samson Carrasco to hear, and Samson and he regarded one another
with looks of astonishment at what they had read, and the bachelor
asked who had brought the letters. Teresa in reply bade them come with
her to her house and they would see the messenger, a most elegant
youth, who had brought another present which was worth as much more.
The curate took the coral beads from her neck and examined them again
and again, and having satisfied himself as to their fineness he fell
to wondering afresh, and said, "By the gown I wear I don't know what
to say or think of these letters and presents; on the one hand I can
see and feel the fineness of these coral beads, and on the other I
read how a duchess sends to beg for a couple of dozen of acorns."
"Square that if you can," said Carrasco; "well, let's go and see the
messenger, and from him we'll learn something about this mystery that
has turned up." They did so, and Teresa returned with them. They found
the page sifting a little barley for his horse, and Sanchica cutting a
rasher of bacon to be paved with eggs for his dinner. His looks and
his handsome apparel pleased them both greatly; and after they had
saluted him courteously, and he them, Samson begged him to give them
his news, as well of Don Quixote as of Sancho Panza, for, he said,
though they had read the letters from Sancho and her ladyship the
duchess, they were still puzzled and could not make out what was meant
by Sancho's government, and above all of an island, when all or most
of those in the Mediterranean belonged to his Majesty. To this the
page replied, "As to Senor Sancho Panza's being a governor there is no
doubt whatever; but whether it is an island or not that he governs,
with that I have nothing to do; suffice it that it is a town of more
than a thousand inhabitants; with regard to the acorns I may tell you
my lady the duchess is so unpretending and unassuming that, not to
speak of sending to beg for acorns from a peasant woman, she has been
known to send to ask for the loan of a comb from one of her
neighbours; for I would have your worships know that the ladies of
Aragon, though they are just as illustrious, are not so punctilious
and haughty as the Castilian ladies; they treat people with greater
familiarity." In the middle of this conversation Sanchica came in with
her skirt full of eggs, and said she to the page, "Tell me, senor,
does my father wear trunk-hose since he has been governor?" "I have
not noticed," said the page; "but no doubt he wears them." "Ah! my
God!" said Sanchica, "what a sight it must be to see my father in
tights! Isn't it odd that ever since I was born I have had a longing
to see my father in trunk-hose?" "As things go you will see that if
you live," said the page; "by God he is in the way to take the road
with a sunshade if the government only lasts him two months more." The
curate and the bachelor could see plainly enough that the page spoke
in a waggish vein; but the fineness of the coral beads, and the
hunting suit that Sancho sent (for Teresa had already shown it to
them) did away with the impression; and they could not help laughing
at Sanchica's wish, and still more when Teresa said, "Senor curate,
look about if there's anybody here going to Madrid or Toledo, to buy
me a hooped petticoat, a proper fashionable one of the best quality;
for indeed and indeed I must do honour to my husband's government as
well as I can; nay, if I am put to it and have to, I'll go to Court
and set a coach like all the world; for she who has a governor for her
husband may very well have one and keep one." "And why not, mother!"
said Sanchica; "would to God it were to-day instead of to-morrow, even
though they were to say when they saw me seated in the coach with my
mother, 'See that rubbish, that garlic-stuffed fellow's daughter, how
she goes stretched at her ease in a coach as if she was a she-pope!'
But let them tramp through the mud, and let me go in my coach with my
feet off the ground. Bad luck to backbiters all over the world; 'let
me go warm and the people may laugh.' Do I say right, mother?" "To be
sure you do, my child," said Teresa; "and all this good luck, and even
more, my good Sancho foretold me; and thou wilt see, my daughter, he
won't stop till he has made me a countess; for to make a beginning is
everything in luck; and as I have heard thy good father say many a
time (for besides being thy father he's the father of proverbs too),
'When they offer thee a heifer, run with a halter; when they offer
thee a government, take it; when they would give thee a county, seize
it; when they say, "Here, here!" to thee with something good, swallow
it.' Oh no! go to sleep, and don't answer the strokes of good fortune
and the lucky chances that are knocking at the door of your house!"
"And what do I care," added Sanchica, "whether anybody says when he
sees me holding my head up, 'The dog saw himself in hempen breeches,'
and the rest of it?" Hearing this the curate said, "I do believe that
all this family of the Panzas are born with a sackful of proverbs in
their insides, every one of them; I never saw one of them that does
not pour them out at all times and on all occasions." "That is true,"
said the page, "for Senor Governor Sancho utters them at every turn;
and though a great many of them are not to the purpose, still they
amuse one, and my lady the duchess and the duke praise them highly."
"Then you still maintain that all this about Sancho's government is
true, senor," said the bachelor, "and that there actually is a duchess
who sends him presents and writes to him? Because we, although we have
handled the present and read the letters, don't believe it and suspect
it to be something in the line of our fellow-townsman Don Quixote, who
fancies that everything is done by enchantment; and for this reason I
am almost ready to say that I'd like to touch and feel your worship to
see whether you are a mere ambassador of the imagination or a man of
flesh and blood." "All I know, sirs," replied the page, "is that I am
a real ambassador, and that Senor Sancho Panza is governor as a matter
of fact, and that my lord and lady the duke and duchess can give, and
have given him this same government, and that I have heard the said
Sancho Panza bears himself very stoutly therein; whether there be any
enchantment in all this or not, it is for your worships to settle
between you; for that's all I know by the oath I swear, and that is by
the life of my parents whom I have still alive, and love dearly." "It
may be so," said the bachelor; "but dubitat Augustinus." "Doubt who
will," said the page; "what I have told you is the truth, and that
will always rise above falsehood as oil above water; if not operibus
credite, et non verbis. Let one of you come with me, and he will see
with his eyes what he does not believe with his ears." "It's for me to
make that trip," said Sanchica; "take me with you, senor, behind you
on your horse; for I'll go with all my heart to see my father."
"Governors' daughters," said the page, "must not travel along the
roads alone, but accompanied by coaches and litters and a great number
of attendants." "By God," said Sanchica, "I can go just as well
mounted on a she-ass as in a coach; what a dainty lass you must take
me for!" "Hush, girl," said Teresa; "you don't know what you're
talking about; the gentleman is quite right, for 'as the time so the
behaviour;' when it was Sancho it was 'Sancha;' when it is governor
it's 'senora;' I don't know if I'm right." "Senora Teresa says more
than she is aware of," said the page; "and now give me something to
eat and let me go at once, for I mean to return this evening." "Come
and do penance with me," said the curate at this; "for Senora Teresa
has more will than means to serve so worthy a guest." The page
refused, but had to consent at last for his own sake; and the curate
took him home with him very gladly, in order to have an opportunity of
questioning him at leisure about Don Quixote and his doings. The
bachelor offered to write the letters in reply for Teresa; but she did
not care to let him mix himself up in her affairs, for she thought him
somewhat given to joking; and so she gave a cake and a couple of eggs
to a young acolyte who was a penman, and he wrote for her two letters,
one for her husband and the other for the duchess, dictated out of her
own head, which are not the worst inserted in this great history, as
will be seen farther on. CHAPTER L. WHEREIN IS SET FORTH WHO THE
ENCHANTERS AND EXECUTIONERS WERE WHO FLOGGED THE DUENNA AND PINCHED
DON QUIXOTE, AND ALSO WHAT BEFELL THE PAGE WHO CARRIED THE LETTER TO
TERESA PANZA, SANCHO PANZA'S WIFE Cide Hamete, the painstaking
investigator of the minute points of this veracious history, says that
when Dona Rodriguez left her own room to go to Don Quixote's, another
duenna who slept with her observed her, and as all duennas are fond of
prying, listening, and sniffing, she followed her so silently that the
good Rodriguez never perceived it; and as soon as the duenna saw her
enter Don Quixote's room, not to fail in a duenna's invariable
practice of tattling, she hurried off that instant to report to the
duchess how Dona Rodriguez was closeted with Don Quixote. The duchess
told the duke, and asked him to let her and Altisidora go and see what
the said duenna wanted with Don Quixote. The duke gave them leave, and
the pair cautiously and quietly crept to the door of the room and
posted themselves so close to it that they could hear all that was
said inside. But when the duchess heard how the Rodriguez had made
public the Aranjuez of her issues she could not restrain herself, nor
Altisidora either; and so, filled with rage and thirsting for
vengeance, they burst into the room and tormented Don Quixote and
flogged the duenna in the manner already described; for indignities
offered to their charms and self-esteem mightily provoke the anger of
women and make them eager for revenge. The duchess told the duke what
had happened, and he was much amused by it; and she, in pursuance of
her design of making merry and diverting herself with Don Quixote,
despatched the page who had played the part of Dulcinea in the
negotiations for her disenchantment (which Sancho Panza in the cares
of government had forgotten all about) to Teresa Panza his wife with
her husband's letter and another from herself, and also a great string
of fine coral beads as a present. Now the history says this page was
very sharp and quick-witted; and eager to serve his lord and lady he
set off very willingly for Sancho's village. Before he entered it he
observed a number of women washing in a brook, and asked them if they
could tell him whether there lived there a woman of the name of Teresa
Panza, wife of one Sancho Panza, squire to a knight called Don Quixote
of La Mancha. At the question a young girl who was washing stood up
and said, "Teresa Panza is my mother, and that Sancho is my father,
and that knight is our master." "Well then, miss," said the page,
"come and show me where your mother is, for I bring her a letter and a
present from your father." "That I will with all my heart, senor,"
said the girl, who seemed to be about fourteen, more or less; and
leaving the clothes she was washing to one of her companions, and
without putting anything on her head or feet, for she was bare-legged
and had her hair hanging about her, away she skipped in front of the
page's horse, saying, "Come, your worship, our house is at the
entrance of the town, and my mother is there, sorrowful enough at not
having had any news of my father this ever so long." "Well," said the
page, "I am bringing her such good news that she will have reason to
thank God." And then, skipping, running, and capering, the girl
reached the town, but before going into the house she called out at
the door, "Come out, mother Teresa, come out, come out; here's a
gentleman with letters and other things from my good father." At these
words her mother Teresa Panza came out spinning a bundle of flax, in a
grey petticoat (so short was it one would have fancied "they to her
shame had cut it short"), a grey bodice of the same stuff, and a
smock. She was not very old, though plainly past forty, strong,
healthy, vigorous, and sun-dried; and seeing her daughter and the page
on horseback, she exclaimed, "What's this, child? What gentleman is
this?" "A servant of my lady, Dona Teresa Panza," replied the page;
and suiting the action to the word he flung himself off his horse, and
with great humility advanced to kneel before the lady Teresa, saying,
"Let me kiss your hand, Senora Dona Teresa, as the lawful and only
wife of Senor Don Sancho Panza, rightful governor of the island of
Barataria." "Ah, senor, get up, do that," said Teresa; "for I'm not a
bit of a court lady, but only a poor country woman, the daughter of a
clodcrusher, and the wife of a squire-errant and not of any governor
at all." "You are," said the page, "the most worthy wife of a most
arch-worthy governor; and as a proof of what I say accept this letter
and this present;" and at the same time he took out of his pocket a
string of coral beads with gold clasps, and placed it on her neck, and
said, "This letter is from his lordship the governor, and the other as
well as these coral beads from my lady the duchess, who sends me to
your worship." Teresa stood lost in astonishment, and her daughter
just as much, and the girl said, "May I die but our master Don
Quixote's at the bottom of this; he must have given father the
government or county he so often promised him." "That is the truth,"
said the page; "for it is through Senor Don Quixote that Senor Sancho
is now governor of the island of Barataria, as will be seen by this
letter." "Will your worship read it to me, noble sir?" said Teresa;
"for though I can spin I can't read, not a scrap." "Nor I either,"
said Sanchica; "but wait a bit, and I'll go and fetch some one who can
read it, either the curate himself or the bachelor Samson Carrasco,
and they'll come gladly to hear any news of my father." "There is no
need to fetch anybody," said the page; "for though I can't spin I can
read, and I'll read it;" and so he read it through, but as it has been
already given it is not inserted here; and then he took out the other
one from the duchess, which ran as follows: Friend Teresa,--Your
husband Sancho's good qualities, of heart as well as of head, induced
and compelled me to request my husband the duke to give him the
government of one of his many islands. I am told he governs like a
gerfalcon, of which I am very glad, and my lord the duke, of course,
also; and I am very thankful to heaven that I have not made a mistake
in choosing him for that same government; for I would have Senora
Teresa know that a good governor is hard to find in this world and may
God make me as good as Sancho's way of governing. Herewith I send you,
my dear, a string of coral beads with gold clasps, and placed it on
her neck, and said, "This letter is from his lordship the governor,
and the other as well as these coral beads from my lady the duchess,
who sends me to your worship." Teresa stood lost in astonishment, and
her daughter just as much, and the girl said, "May I die but our
master Don Quixote's at the bottom of this; he must have given father
the government or county he so often promised him." "That is the
truth," said the page; "for it is through Senor Don Quixote that Senor
Sancho is now governor of the island of Barataria, as will be seen by
this letter." "Will your worship read it to me, noble sir?" said
Teresa; "for though I can spin I can't read, not a scrap." "Nor I
either," said Sanchica; "but wait a bit, and I'll go and fetch some
one who can read it, either the curate himself or the bachelor Samson
Carrasco, and they'll come gladly to hear any news of my father."
"There is no need to fetch anybody," said the page; "for though I
can't spin I can read, and I'll read it;" and so he read it through,
but as it has been already given it is not inserted here; and then he
took out the other one from the duchess, which ran as follows: Friend
Teresa,--Your husband Sancho's good qualities, of heart as well as of
head, induced and compelled me to request my husband the duke to give
him the government of one of his many islands. I am told he governs
like a gerfalcon, of which I am very glad, and my lord the duke, of
course, also; and I am very thankful to heaven that I have not made a
mistake in choosing him for that same government; for I would have
Senora Teresa know that a good governor is hard to find in this world
and may God make me as good as Sancho's way of governing. Herewith I
send you, my dear, a string of coral beads with gold clasps; I wish
they were Oriental pearls; but "he who gives thee a bone does not wish
to see thee dead;" a time will come when we shall become acquainted
and meet one another, but God knows the future. Commend me to your
daughter Sanchica, and tell her from me to hold herself in readiness,
for I mean to make a high match for her when she least expects it.
They tell me there are big acorns in your village; send me a couple of
dozen or so, and I shall value them greatly as coming from your hand;
and write to me at length to assure me of your health and well-being;
and if there be anything you stand in need of, it is but to open your
mouth, and that shall be the measure; and so God keep you. From this
place. Your loving friend, THE DUCHESS. "Ah, what a good, plain, lowly
lady!" said Teresa when she heard the letter; "that I may be buried
with ladies of that sort, and not the gentlewomen we have in this
town, that fancy because they are gentlewomen the wind must not touch
them, and go to church with as much airs as if they were queens, no
less, and seem to think they are disgraced if they look at a farmer's
wife! And see here how this good lady, for all she's a duchess, calls
me 'friend,' and treats me as if I was her equal--and equal may I see
her with the tallest church-tower in La Mancha! And as for the acorns,
senor, I'll send her ladyship a peck and such big ones that one might
come to see them as a show and a wonder. And now, Sanchica, see that
the gentleman is comfortable; put up his horse, and get some eggs out
of the stable, and cut plenty of bacon, and let's give him his dinner
like a prince; for the good news he has brought, and his own bonny
face deserve it all; and meanwhile I'll run out and give the
neighbours the news of our good luck, and father curate, and Master
Nicholas the barber, who are and always have been such friends of thy
father's." "That I will, mother," said Sanchica; "but mind, you must
give me half of that string; for I don't think my lady the duchess
could have been so stupid as to send it all to you." "It is all for
thee, my child," said Teresa; "but let me wear it round my neck for a
few days; for verily it seems to make my heart glad." "You will be
glad too," said the page, "when you see the bundle there is in this
portmanteau, for it is a suit of the finest cloth, that the governor
only wore one day out hunting and now sends, all for Senora Sanchica."
"May he live a thousand years," said Sanchica, "and the bearer as
many, nay two thousand, if needful." With this Teresa hurried out of
the house with the letters, and with the string of beads round her
neck, and went along thrumming the letters as if they were a
tambourine, and by chance coming across the curate and Samson Carrasco
she began capering and saying, "None of us poor now, faith! We've got
a little government! Ay, let the finest fine lady tackle me, and I'll
give her a setting down!" "What's all this, Teresa Panza," said they;
"what madness is this, and what papers are those?" "The madness is
only this," said she, "that these are the letters of duchesses and
governors, and these I have on my neck are fine coral beads, with
ave-marias and paternosters of beaten gold, and I am a governess."
"God help us," said the curate, "we don't understand you, Teresa, or
know what you are talking about." "There, you may see it yourselves,"
said Teresa, and she handed them the letters. The curate read them out
for Samson Carrasco to hear, and Samson and he regarded one another
with looks of astonishment at what they had read, and the bachelor
asked who had brought the letters. Teresa in reply bade them come with
her to her house and they would see the messenger, a most elegant
youth, who had brought another present which was worth as much more.
The curate took the coral beads from her neck and examined them again
and again, and having satisfied himself as to their fineness he fell
to wondering afresh, and said, "By the gown I wear I don't know what
to say or think of these letters and presents; on the one hand I can
see and feel the fineness of these coral beads, and on the other I
read how a duchess sends to beg for a couple of dozen of acorns."
"Square that if you can," said Carrasco; "well, let's go and see the
messenger, and from him we'll learn something about this mystery that
has turned up." They did so, and Teresa returned with them. They found
the page sifting a little barley for his horse, and Sanchica cutting a
rasher of bacon to be paved with eggs for his dinner. His looks and
his handsome apparel pleased them both greatly; and after they had
saluted him courteously, and he them, Samson begged him to give them
his news, as well of Don Quixote as of Sancho Panza, for, he said,
though they had read the letters from Sancho and her ladyship the
duchess, they were still puzzled and could not make out what was meant
by Sancho's government, and above all of an island, when all or most
of those in the Mediterranean belonged to his Majesty. To this the
page replied, "As to Senor Sancho Panza's being a governor there is no
doubt whatever; but whether it is an island or not that he governs,
with that I have nothing to do; suffice it that it is a town of more
than a thousand inhabitants; with regard to the acorns I may tell you
my lady the duchess is so unpretending and unassuming that, not to
speak of sending to beg for acorns from a peasant woman, she has been
known to send to ask for the loan of a comb from one of her
neighbours; for I would have your worships know that the ladies of
Aragon, though they are just as illustrious, are not so punctilious
and haughty as the Castilian ladies; they treat people with greater
familiarity." In the middle of this conversation Sanchica came in with
her skirt full of eggs, and said she to the page, "Tell me, senor,
does my father wear trunk-hose since he has been governor?" "I have
not noticed," said the page; "but no doubt he wears them." "Ah! my
God!" said Sanchica, "what a sight it must be to see my father in
tights! Isn't it odd that ever since I was born I have had a longing
to see my father in trunk-hose?" "As things go you will see that if
you live," said the page; "by God he is in the way to take the road
with a sunshade if the government only lasts him two months more." The
curate and the bachelor could see plainly enough that the page spoke
in a waggish vein; but the fineness of the coral beads, and the
hunting suit that Sancho sent (for Teresa had already shown it to
them) did away with the impression; and they could not help laughing
at Sanchica's wish, and still more when Teresa said, "Senor curate,
look about if there's anybody here going to Madrid or Toledo, to buy
me a hooped petticoat, a proper fashionable one of the best quality;
for indeed and indeed I must do honour to my husband's government as
well as I can; nay, if I am put to it and have to, I'll go to Court
and set a coach like all the world; for she who has a governor for her
husband may very well have one and keep one." "And why not, mother!"
said Sanchica; "would to God it were to-day instead of to-morrow, even
though they were to say when they saw me seated in the coach with my
mother, 'See that rubbish, that garlic-stuffed fellow's daughter, how
she goes stretched at her ease in a coach as if she was a she-pope!'
But let them tramp through the mud, and let me go in my coach with my
feet off the ground. Bad luck to backbiters all over the world; 'let
me go warm and the people may laugh.' Do I say right, mother?" "To be
sure you do, my child," said Teresa; "and all this good luck, and even
more, my good Sancho foretold me; and thou wilt see, my daughter, he
won't stop till he has made me a countess; for to make a beginning is
everything in luck; and as I have heard thy good father say many a
time (for besides being thy father he's the father of proverbs too),
'When they offer thee a heifer, run with a halter; and 'when good luck
comes to thee, take it in.'" "Brother Sancho," said Carrasco, "you
have spoken like a professor; but, for all that, put your trust in God
and in Senor Don Quixote, for he will give you a kingdom, not to say
an island." "It is all the same, be it more or be it less," replied
Sancho; "though I can tell Senor Carrasco that my master would not
throw the kingdom he might give me into a sack all in holes; for I
have felt my own pulse and I find myself sound enough to rule kingdoms
and govern islands; and I have before now told my master as much."
"Take care, Sancho," said Samson; "honours change manners, and perhaps
when you find yourself a governor you won't know the mother that bore
you." "That may hold good of those that are born in the ditches," said
Sancho, "not of those who have the fat of an old Christian four
fingers deep on their souls, as I have. Nay, only look at my
disposition, is that likely to show ingratitude to anyone?" "God grant
it," said Don Quixote; "we shall see when the government comes; and I
seem to see it already." He then begged the bachelor, if he were a
poet, to do him the favour of composing some verses for him conveying
the farewell he meant to take of his lady Dulcinea del Toboso, and to
see that a letter of her name was placed at the beginning of each
line, so that, at the end of the verses, "Dulcinea del Toboso" might
be read by putting together the first letters. The bachelor replied
that although he was not one of the famous poets of Spain, who were,
they said, only three and a half, he would not fail to compose the
required verses; though he saw a great difficulty in the task, as the
letters which made up the name were seventeen; so, if he made four
ballad stanzas of four lines each, there would be a letter over, and
if he made them of five, what they called decimas or redondillas,
there were three letters short; nevertheless he would try to drop a
letter as well as he could, so that the name "Dulcinea del Toboso"
might be got into four ballad stanzas. "It must be, by some means or
other," said Don Quixote, "for unless the name stands there plain and
manifest, no woman would believe the verses were made for her." They
agreed upon this, and that the departure should take place in three
days from that time. Don Quixote charged the bachelor to keep it a
secret, especially from the curate and Master Nicholas, and from his
niece and the housekeeper, lest they should prevent the execution of
his praiseworthy and valiant purpose. Carrasco promised all, and then
took his leave, charging Don Quixote to inform him of his good or evil
fortunes whenever he had an opportunity; and thus they bade each other
farewell, and Sancho went away to make the necessary preparations for
their expedition. CHAPTER V. OF THE SHREWD AND DROLL CONVERSATION THAT
PASSED BETWEEN SANCHO PANZA AND HIS WIFE TERESA PANZA, AND OTHER
MATTERS WORTHY OF BEING DULY RECORDED CHAPTER VI OF WHAT TOOK PLACE
BETWEEN DON QUIXOTE AND HIS NIECE AND HOUSEKEEPER; ONE OF THE MOST
IMPORTANT CHAPTERS IN THE WHOLE HISTORY CHAPTER VII OF WHAT PASSED
BETWEEN DON QUIXOTE AND HIS SQUIRE, TOGETHER WITH OTHER VERY NOTABLE
INCIDENTS CHAPTER VIII WHEREIN IS RELATED WHAT BEFELL DON QUIXOTE ON
HIS WAY TO SEE HIS LADY DULCINEA DEL TOBOSO "Blessed be Allah the
all-powerful!" says Hamete Benengeli on beginning this eighth chapter;
"blessed be Allah!" he repeats three times; and he says he utters
these thanksgivings at seeing that he has now got Don Quixote and
Sancho fairly afield, and that the readers of his delightful history
may reckon that the achievements and humours of Don Quixote and his
squire are now about to begin; and he urges them to forget the former
chivalries of the ingenious gentleman and to fix their eyes on those
that are to come, which now begin on the road to El Toboso, as the
others began on the plains of Montiel; nor is it much that he asks in
consideration of all he promises, and so he goes on to say: Don
Quixote and Sancho were left alone, and the moment Samson took his
departure, Rocinante began to neigh, and Dapple to sigh, which, by
both knight and squire, was accepted as a good sign and a very happy
omen; though, if the truth is to be told, I like them both; though I
have never seen the lady Dulcinea." "How! never seen her, blasphemous
traitor!" exclaimed Don Quixote; "hast thou not just now brought me a
message from her?" "I mean," said Sancho, "that I did not see her so
much at my leisure that I could take particular notice of her beauty,
or of her charms piecemeal; but taken in the lump I like her." "Now I
forgive thee," said Don Quixote; "and do thou forgive me the injury I
have done thee; for our first impulses are not in our control." "That
I see," replied Sancho, "and with me the wish to speak is always the
first impulse, and I cannot help saying, once at any rate, what I have
on the tip of my tongue." "For all that, Sancho," said Don Quixote,
"take heed of what thou sayest, for the pitcher goes so often to the
well--I need say no more to thee." "Well, well," said Sancho, "God is
in heaven, and sees all tricks, and will judge who does most harm, I
in not speaking right, or your worship in not doing it." "That is
enough," said Dorothea; "run, Sancho, and kiss your lord's hand and
beg his pardon, and henceforward be more circumspect with your praise
and abuse; and say nothing in disparagement of that lady Toboso, of
whom I know nothing save that I am her servant; and put your trust in
God, for you will not fail to obtain some dignity so as to live like a
prince." Sancho advanced hanging his head and begged his master's
hand, which Don Quixote with dignity presented to him, giving him his
blessing as soon as he had kissed it; he then bade him go on ahead a
little, as he had questions to ask him and matters of great importance
to discuss with him. At the same time he bade Camilla not to leave
Lothario alone until he came back. In short he contrived to put so
good a face on the reason, or the folly, of his absence that no one
could have suspected it was a pretence. Anselmo took his departure,
and Camilla and Lothario were left alone at the table, for the rest of
the household had gone to dinner. Lothario saw himself in the lists
according to his friend's wish, and facing an enemy that could by her
beauty alone vanquish a squadron of armed knights; judge whether he
had good reason to fear; but what he did was to lean his elbow on the
arm of the chair, and his cheek upon his hand, and, asking Camilla's
pardon for his ill manners, he said he wished to take a little sleep
until Anselmo returned. Camilla in reply said he could repose more at
his ease in the reception-room than in his chair, and begged of him to
go in and sleep there; but Lothario declined, and there he remained
asleep until the return of Anselmo, who finding Camilla in her own
room, and Lothario asleep, imagined that he had stayed away so long as
to have afforded them time enough for conversation and even for sleep,
and was all impatience until Lothario should wake up, that he might go
out with him and question him as to his success. Everything fell out
as he wished; Lothario awoke, and the two at once left the house, and
Anselmo asked what he was anxious to know, and Lothario in answer told
him that he had not thought it advisable to declare himself entirely
the first time, and therefore had only extolled the charms of Camilla,
telling her that all the city spoke of nothing else but her beauty and
wit, for this seemed to him an excellent way of beginning to gain her
good-will and render her disposed to listen to him with pleasure the
next time, thus availing himself of the device the devil has recourse
to when he would deceive one who is on the watch; for he being the
angel of darkness transforms himself into an angel of light, and,
under cover of a fair seeming, discloses himself at length, and
effects his purpose if at the beginning his wiles are not discovered.
All this gave great satisfaction to Anselmo, and he said he would
afford the same opportunity every day, but without leaving the house,
for he would find things to do at home so that Camilla should not
detect the plot. Thus, then, several days went by, and Lothario,
without uttering a word to Camilla, reported to Anselmo that he had
talked with her and that he had never been able to draw from her the
slightest indication of consent to anything dishonourable, nor even a
sign or shadow of hope; on the contrary, he said she would inform her
husband of it. "So far well," said Anselmo; "Camilla has thus far
resisted words; we must now see how she will resist deeds. I will give
you to-morrow two thousand crowns in gold for you to offer or even
present, and as many more to buy jewels to lure her, for women are
fond of being becomingly attired and going gaily dressed, and all the
more so if they are beautiful, however chaste they may be; and if she
resists this temptation, I will rest satisfied and will give you no
more trouble." Lothario replied that now he had begun he would carry
on the undertaking to the end, though he perceived he was to come out
of it wearied and vanquished. The next day he received the four
thousand crowns, and with them four thousand perplexities, for he knew
not what to say by way of a new falsehood; but in the end he made up
his mind to tell him that Camilla stood as firm against gifts and
promises as against words, and that there was no use in taking any
further trouble, for the time was all spent to no purpose. But chance,
directing things in a different manner, so ordered it that Anselmo,
having left Lothario and Camilla alone as on other occasions, shut
himself into a chamber and posted himself to watch and listen through
the keyhole to what passed between them, and perceived that for more
than half an hour Lothario did not utter a word to Camilla, nor would
utter a word though he were to be there for an age; and he came to the
conclusion that what his friend had told him about the replies of
Camilla was all invention and falsehood, and to ascertain if it were
so, he came out, and calling Lothario aside asked him what news he had
and in what humour Camilla was. Lothario replied that he was not
disposed to go on with the business, for she had answered him so
angrily and harshly that he had no heart to say anything more to her.
"Ah, Lothario, Lothario," said Anselmo, "how ill dost thou meet thy
obligations to me, and the great confidence I repose in thee! I have
been just now watching through this keyhole, and I have seen that thou
has not said a word to Camilla, whence I conclude that on the former
occasions thou hast not spoken to her either, and if this be so, as no
doubt it is, why dost thou deceive me, or wherefore seekest thou by
craft to deprive me of the means I might find of attaining my desire?"
Anselmo said no more, but he had said enough to cover Lothario with
shame and confusion, and he, feeling as it were his honour touched by
having been detected in a lie, swore to Anselmo that he would from
that moment devote himself to satisfying him without any deception, as
he would see if he had the curiosity to watch; though he need not take
the trouble, for the pains he would take to satisfy him would remove
all suspicions from his mind. Anselmo believed him, and to afford him
an opportunity more free and less liable to surprise, he resolved to
absent himself from his house for eight days, betaking himself to that
of a friend of his who lived in a village not far from the city; and,
the better to account for his departure to Camilla, he so arranged it
that the friend should send him a very pressing invitation. Unhappy,
shortsighted Anselmo, what art thou doing, what art thou plotting,
what art thou devising? Bethink thee thou art working against thyself,
plotting thine own dishonour, devising thine own ruin. Thy wife
Camilla is virtuous, thou dost possess her in peace and quietness, no
one assails thy happiness, her thoughts wander not beyond the walls of
thy house, thou art her heaven on earth, the object of her wishes, the
fulfilment of her desires, the measure wherewith she measures her
will, making it conform in all things to thine and Heaven's. If, then,
the mine of her honour, beauty, virtue, and modesty yields thee
without labour all the wealth it contains and thou canst wish for, why
wilt thou dig the earth in search of fresh veins, of new unknown
treasure, risking the collapse of all, since it but rests on the
feeble props of her weak nature? Bethink thee that from him who seeks
impossibilities that which is possible may with justice be withheld,
as was better expressed by a poet who said: 'Tis mine to seek for life
in death, Health in disease seek I, I seek in prison freedom's breath,
In traitors loyalty. So Fate that ever scorns to grant Or grace or
boon to me, Since what can never be I want, Denies me what might be.
The next day Anselmo took his departure for the village, leaving
instructions with Camilla that during his absence Lothario would come
to look after his house and to dine with her, and that she was to
treat him as she would himself. Camilla was distressed, as a discreet
and right-minded woman would be, at the orders her husband left her,
and bade him remember that it was not becoming that anyone should
occupy his seat at the table during his absence, and if he acted thus
from not feeling confidence that she would be able to manage his
house, let him try her this time, and he would find by experience that
she was equal to greater responsibilities. Anselmo replied that it was
his pleasure to have it so, and that she had only to submit and obey.
Camilla said she would do so, though against her will. Anselmo went,
and the next day Lothario came to his house, where he was received by
Camilla with a friendly and modest welcome; but she never suffered
Lothario to see her alone, for she was always attended by her men and
women servants, especially by a handmaid of hers, Leonela by name, to
whom she was much attached (for they had been brought up together from
childhood in her father's house), and whom she had kept with her after
her marriage with Anselmo. The first three days Lothario did not speak
to her, though he might have done so when they removed the cloth and
the servants retired to dine hastily; for such were Camilla's orders;
nay more, Leonela had directions to dine earlier than Camilla and
never to leave her side. She, however, having her thoughts fixed upon
other things more to her taste, and wanting that time and opportunity
for her own pleasures, did not always obey her mistress's commands,
but on the contrary left them alone, as if they had ordered her to do
so; but the modest bearing of Camilla, the calmness of her
countenance, the composure of her aspect were enough to bridle the
tongue of Lothario. But the influence which the many virtues of
Camilla exerted in imposing silence on Lothario's tongue proved
mischievous for both of them, for if his tongue was silent his
thoughts were busy, and could dwell at leisure upon the perfections of
Camilla's goodness and beauty one by one, charms enough to warm with
love a marble statue, not to say a heart of flesh. Lothario gazed upon
her when he might have been speaking to her, and thought how worthy of
being loved she was; and thus reflection began little by little to
assail his allegiance to Anselmo, and a thousand times he thought of
withdrawing from the city and going where Anselmo should never see him
nor he see Camilla. But already the delight he found in gazing on her
interposed and held him fast. He put a constraint upon himself, and
struggled to repel and repress the pleasure he found in contemplating
Camilla; when alone he blamed himself for his weakness, called himself
a bad friend, nay a bad Christian; then he argued the matter and
compared himself with Anselmo; always coming to the conclusion that
the folly and rashness of Anselmo had been worse than his
faithlessness, and that if he could excuse his intentions as easily
before God as with man, he had no reason to fear any punishment for
his offence. In short the beauty and goodness of Camilla, joined with
the opportunity which the blind husband had placed in his hands,
overthrew the loyalty of Lothario; and giving heed to nothing save the
object towards which his inclinations led him, after Anselmo had been
three days absent, during which he had been carrying on a continual
struggle with his passion, he began to make love to Camilla with so
much vehemence and warmth of language that she was overwhelmed with
amazement, and could only rise from her place and retire to her room
without answering him a word. But the hope which always springs up
with love was not weakened in Lothario by this repelling demeanour; on
the contrary his passion for Camilla increased, and she discovering in
him what she had never expected, knew not what to do; and considering
it neither safe nor right to give him the chance or opportunity of
speaking to her again, she resolved to send, as she did that very
night, one of her servants with a letter to Anselmo, in which she
addressed the following words to him. CHAPTER XXXIV. IN WHICH IS
CONTINUED THE NOVEL OF "THE ILL-ADVISED CURIOSITY" "It is commonly
said that an army looks ill without its general and a castle without
its castellan, and I say that a young married woman looks still worse
without her husband unless there are very good reasons for it. I find
myself so ill at ease without you, and so incapable of enduring this
separation, that unless you return quickly I shall have to go for
relief to my parents' house, even if I leave yours without a
protector; for the one you left me, if indeed he deserved that title,
has, I think, more regard to his own pleasure than to what concerns
you: as you are possessed of discernment I need say no more to you,
nor indeed is it fitting I should say more." Anselmo received this
letter, and from it he gathered that Lothario had already begun his
task and that Camilla must have replied to him as he would have
wished; and delighted beyond measure at such intelligence he sent word
to her not to leave his house on any account, as he would very shortly
return. Camilla was astonished at Anselmo's reply, which placed her in
greater perplexity than before, for she neither dared to remain in her
own house, nor yet to go to her parents'; for in remaining her virtue
was imperilled, and in going she was opposing her husband's commands.
Finally she decided upon what was the worse course for her, to remain,
resolving not to fly from the presence of Lothario, that she might not
give food for gossip to her servants; and she now began to regret
having written as she had to her husband, fearing he might imagine
that Lothario had perceived in her some lightness which had impelled
him to lay aside the respect he owed her; but confident of her
rectitude she put her trust in God and in her own virtuous intentions,
with which she hoped to resist in silence all the solicitations of
Lothario, without saying anything to her husband so as not to involve
him in any quarrel or trouble; and she even began to consider how to
excuse Lothario to Anselmo when he should ask her what it was that
induced her to write that letter. With these resolutions, more
honourable than judicious or effectual, she remained the next day
listening to Lothario, who pressed his suit so strenuously that
Camilla's firmness began to waver, and her virtue had enough to do to
come to the rescue of her eyes and keep them from showing signs of a
certain tender compassion which the tears and appeals of Lothario had
awakened in her bosom. Lothario observed all this, and it inflamed him
all the more. In short he felt that while Anselmo's absence afforded
time and opportunity he must press the siege of the fortress, and so
he assailed her self-esteem with praises of her beauty, for there is
nothing that more quickly reduces and levels the castle towers of fair
women's vanity than vanity itself upon the tongue of flattery. In fact
with the utmost assiduity he undermined the rock of her purity with
such engines that had Camilla been of brass she must have fallen. He
wept, he entreated, he promised, he flattered, he importuned, he
pretended with so much feeling and apparent sincerity, that he
overthrew the virtuous resolves of Camilla and won the triumph he
least expected and most longed for. Camilla yielded, Camilla fell; but
what wonder if the friendship of Lothario could not stand firm? A
clear proof to us that the passion of love is to be conquered only by
flying from it, and that no one should engage in a struggle with an
enemy so mighty; for divine strength is needed to overcome his human
power. Leonela alone knew of her mistress's weakness, for the two
false friends and new lovers were unable to conceal it. Lothario did
not care to tell Camilla the object Anselmo had in view, nor that he
had afforded him the opportunity of attaining such a result, lest she
should undervalue his love and think that it was by chance and without
intending it and not of his own accord that he had made love to her. A
few days later Anselmo returned to his house and did not perceive what
it had lost, that which he so lightly treated and so highly prized. He
went at once to see Lothario, and found him at home; they embraced
each other, and Anselmo asked for the tidings of his life or his
death. "The tidings I have to give thee, Anselmo my friend," said
Lothario, "are that thou dost possess a wife that is worthy to be the
pattern and crown of all good wives. The words that I have addressed
to her were borne away on the wind, my promises have been despised, my
presents have been refused, such feigned tears as I shed have been
turned into open ridicule. In short, as Camilla is the essence of all
beauty, so is she the treasure-house where purity dwells, and
gentleness and modesty abide with all the virtues that can confer
praise, honour, and happiness upon a woman. Take back thy money, my
friend; here it is, and I have had no need to touch it, for the
chastity of Camilla yields not to things so base as gifts or promises.
Be content, Anselmo, and refrain from making further proof; and as
thou hast passed dryshod through the sea of those doubts and
suspicions that are and may be entertained of women, seek not to
plunge again into the deep ocean of new embarrassments, or with
another pilot make trial of the goodness and strength of the bark that
Heaven has granted thee for thy passage across the sea of this world;
but reckon thyself now safe in port, moor thyself with the anchor of
sound reflection, and rest in peace until thou art called upon to pay
that debt which no nobility on earth can escape paying." Anselmo was
completely satisfied by the words of Lothario, and believed them as
fully as if they had been spoken by an oracle; nevertheless he begged
of him not to relinquish the undertaking, were it but for the sake of
curiosity and amusement; though thenceforward he need not make use of
the same earnest endeavours as before; all he wished him to do was to
write some verses to her, praising her under the name of Chloris, for
he himself would give her to understand that he was in love with a
lady to whom he had given that name to enable him to sing her praises
with the decorum due to her modesty; and if Lothario were unwilling to
take the trouble of writing the verses he would compose them himself.
"That will not be necessary," said Lothario, "for the muses are not
such enemies of mine but that they visit me now and then in the course
of the year. Do thou tell Camilla what thou hast proposed about a
pretended amour of mine; as for the verses will make them, and if not
as good as the subject deserves, they shall be at least the best I can
produce." An agreement to this effect was made between the friends,
the ill-advised one and the treacherous, and Anselmo returning to his
house asked Camilla the question she already wondered he had not asked
before--what it was that had caused her to write the letter she had
sent him. Camilla replied that it had seemed to her that Lothario
looked at her somewhat more freely than when he had been at home; but
that now she was undeceived and believed it to have been only her own
imagination, for Lothario now avoided seeing her, or being alone with
her. Anselmo told her she might be quite easy on the score of that
suspicion, for he knew that Lothario was in love with a damsel of rank
in the city whom he celebrated under the name of Chloris, and that
even if he were not, his fidelity and their great friendship left no
room for fear. Had not Camilla, however, been informed beforehand by
Lothario that this love for Chloris was a pretence, and that he
himself had told Anselmo of it in order to be able sometimes to give
utterance to the praises of Camilla herself, no doubt she would have
fallen into the despairing toils of jealousy; but being forewarned she
received the startling news without uneasiness. The next day as the
three were at table Anselmo asked Lothario to recite something of what
he had composed for his mistress Chloris; for as Camilla did not know
her, he might safely say what he liked. "Even did she know her,"
returned Lothario, "I would hide nothing, for when a lover praises his
lady's beauty, and charges her with cruelty, he casts no imputation
upon her fair name; at any rate, all I can say is that yesterday I
made a sonnet on the ingratitude of this Chloris, which goes thus:
SONNET At midnight, in the silence, when the eyes Of happier mortals
balmy slumbers close, The weary tale of my unnumbered woes To Chloris
and to Heaven is wont to rise. And when the light of day returning
dyes The portals of the east with tints of rose, With undiminished
force my sorrow flows In broken accents and in burning sighs. And when
the sun ascends his star-girt throne, And on the earth pours down his
midday beams, Noon but renews my wailing and my tears; And with the
night again goes up my moan. Yet ever in my agony it seems To me that
neither Heaven nor Chloris hears." The sonnet pleased Camilla, and
still more Anselmo, for he praised it and said the lady was
excessively cruel who made no return for sincerity so manifest. On
which Camilla said, "Then all that love-smitten poets say is true?"
"As poets they do not tell the truth," replied Lothario; "but as
lovers they are not more defective in expression than they are
truthful." "There is no doubt of that," observed Anselmo, anxious to
support and uphold Lothario's ideas with Camilla, who was as
regardless of his design as she was deep in love with Lothario; and so
taking delight in anything that was his, and knowing that his thoughts
and writings had her for their object, and that she herself was the
real Chloris, she asked him to repeat some other sonnet or verses if
he recollected any. "I do," replied Lothario, "but I do not think it
as good as the first one, or, more correctly speaking, less bad; but
you can easily judge, for it is this. SONNET I know that I am doomed;
death is to me As certain as that thou, ungrateful fair, Dead at thy
feet shouldst see me lying, ere My heart repented of its love for
thee. If buried in oblivion I should be, Bereft of life, fame, favour,
even there It would be found that I thy image bear Deep graven in my
breast for all to see. This like some holy relic do I prize To save me
from the fate my truth entails, Truth that to thy hard heart its
vigour owes. Alas for him that under lowering skies, In peril o'er a
trackless ocean sails, Where neither friendly port nor pole-star
shows." Anselmo praised this second sonnet too, as he had praised the
first; and so he went on adding link after link to the chain with
which he was binding himself and making his dishonour secure; for when
Lothario was doing most to dishonour him he told him he was most
honoured; and thus each step that Camilla descended towards the depths
of her abasement, she mounted, in his opinion, towards the summit of
virtue and fair fame. It so happened that finding herself on one
occasion alone with her maid, Camilla said to her, "I am ashamed to
think, my dear Leonela, how lightly I have valued myself that I did
not compel Lothario to purchase by at least some expenditure of time
that full possession of me that I so quickly yielded him of my own
free will. I fear that he will think ill of my pliancy or lightness,
not considering the irresistible influence he brought to bear upon
me." "Let not that trouble you, my lady," said Leonela, "for it does
not take away the value of the thing given or make it the less
precious to give it quickly if it be really valuable and worthy of
being prized; nay, they are wont to say that he who gives quickly
gives twice." "They say also," said Camilla, "that what costs little
is valued less." "That saying does not hold good in your case,"
replied Leonela, "for love, as I have heard say, sometimes flies and
sometimes walks; with this one it runs, with that it moves slowly;
some it cools, others it burns; some it wounds, others it slays; it
begins the course of its desires, and at the same moment completes and
ends it; in the morning it will lay siege to a fortress and by night
will have taken it, for there is no power that can resist it; so what
are you in dread of, what do you fear, when the same must have
befallen Lothario, love having chosen the absence of my lord as the
instrument for subduing you? and it was absolutely necessary to
complete then what love had resolved upon, without affording the time
to let Anselmo return and by his presence compel the work to be left
unfinished; for love has no better agent for carrying out his designs
than opportunity; and of opportunity he avails himself in all his
feats, especially at the outset. All this I know well myself, more by
experience than by hearsay, and some day, senora, I will enlighten you
on the subject, for I am of your flesh and blood too. Moreover, lady
Camilla, you did not surrender yourself or yield so quickly but that
first you saw Lothario's whole soul in his eyes, in his sighs, in his
words, his promises and his gifts, and by it and his good qualities
perceived how worthy he was of your love. This, then, being the case,
let not these scrupulous and prudish ideas trouble your imagination,
but be assured that Lothario prizes you as you do him, and rest
content and satisfied that as you are caught in the noose of love it
is one of worth and merit that has taken you, and one that has not
only the four S's that they say true lovers ought to have, but a
complete alphabet; only listen to me and you will see how I can repeat
it by rote. He is to my eyes and thinking, Amiable, Brave, Courteous,
Distinguished, Elegant, Fond, Gay, Honourable, Illustrious, Loyal,
Manly, Noble, Open, Polite, Quickwitted, Rich, and the S's according
to the saying, and then Tender, Veracious: X does not suit him, for it
is a rough letter; Y has been given already; and Z Zealous for your
honour." Camilla laughed at her maid's alphabet, and perceived her to
be more experienced in love affairs than she said, which she admitted,
confessing to Camilla that she had love passages with a young man of
good birth of the same city. Camilla was uneasy at this, dreading lest
it might prove the means of endangering her honour, and asked whether
her intrigue had gone beyond words, and she with little shame and much
effrontery said it had; for certain it is that ladies' imprudences
make servants shameless, who, when they see their mistresses make a
false step, think nothing of going astray themselves, or of its being
known. All that Camilla could do was to entreat Leonela to say nothing
about her doings to him whom she called her lover, and to conduct her
own affairs secretly lest they should come to the knowledge of Anselmo
or of Lothario. Leonela said she would, but kept her word in such a
way that she confirmed Camilla's apprehension of losing her reputation
through her means; for this abandoned and bold Leonela, as soon as she
perceived that her mistress's demeanour was not what it was wont to
be, had the audacity to introduce her lover into the house, confident
that even if her mistress saw him she would not dare to expose him;
for the sins of mistresses entail this mischief among others; they
make themselves the slaves of their own servants, and are obliged to
hide their laxities and depravities; as was the case with Camilla, who
though she perceived, not once but many times, that Leonela was with
her lover in some room of the house, not only did not dare to chide
her, but afforded her opportunities for concealing him and removed all
difficulties, lest he should be seen by her husband. She was unable,
however, to prevent him from being seen on one occasion, as he sallied
forth at daybreak, by Lothario, who, not knowing who he was, at first
took him for a spectre; but, as soon as he saw him hasten away,
muffling his face with his cloak and concealing himself carefully and
cautiously, he rejected this foolish idea, and adopted another, which
would have been the ruin of all had not Camilla found a remedy. It did
not occur to Lothario that this man he had seen issuing at such an
untimely hour from Anselmo's house could have entered it on Leonela's
account, nor did he even remember there was such a person as Leonela;
all he thought was that as Camilla had been light and yielding with
him, so she had been with another; for this further penalty the erring
woman's sin brings with it, that her honour is distrusted even by him
to whose overtures and persuasions she has yielded; and he believes
her to have surrendered more easily to others, and gives implicit
credence to every suspicion that comes into his mind. All Lothario's
good sense seems to have failed him at this juncture; all his prudent
maxims escaped his memory; for without once reflecting rationally, and
without more ado, in his impatience and in the blindness of the
jealous rage that gnawed his heart, and dying to revenge himself upon
Camilla, who had done him no wrong, before Anselmo had risen he
hastened to him and said to him, "Know, Anselmo, that for several days
past I have been struggling with myself, striving to withhold from
thee what it is no longer possible or right that I should conceal from
thee. Know that Camilla's fortress has surrendered and is ready to
submit to my will; and if I have been slow to reveal this fact to
thee, it was in order to see if it were some light caprice of hers, or
if she sought to try me and ascertain if the love I began to make to
her with thy permission was made with a serious intention. I thought,
too, that she, if she were what she ought to be, and what we both
believed her, would have ere this given thee information of my
addresses; but seeing that she delays, I believe the truth of the
promise she has given me that the next time thou art absent from the
house she will grant me an interview in the closet where thy jewels
are kept (and it was true that Camilla used to meet him there); but I
do not wish thee to rush precipitately to take vengeance, for the sin
is as yet only committed in intention, and Camilla's may change
perhaps between this and the appointed time, and repentance spring up
in its place. As hitherto thou hast always followed my advice wholly
or in part, follow and observe this that I will give thee now, so
that, without mistake, and with mature deliberation, thou mayest
satisfy thyself as to what may seem the best course; pretend to absent
thyself for two or three days as thou hast been wont to do on other
occasions, and contrive to hide thyself in the closet; for the
tapestries and other things there afford great facilities for thy
concealment, and then thou wilt see with thine own eyes and I with
mine what Camilla's purpose may be. And if it be a guilty one, which
may be feared rather than expected, with silence, prudence, and
discretion thou canst thyself become the instrument of punishment for
the wrong done thee." Anselmo was amazed, overwhelmed, and astounded
at the words of Lothario, which came upon him at a time when he least
expected to hear them, for he now looked upon Camilla as having
triumphed over the pretended attacks of Lothario, and was beginning to
enjoy the glory of her victory. He remained silent for a considerable
time, looking on the ground with fixed gaze, and at length said, "Thou
hast behaved, Lothario, as I expected of thy friendship: I will follow
thy advice in everything; do as thou wilt, and keep this secret as
thou seest it should be kept in circumstances so unlooked for."
Lothario gave him his word, but after leaving him he repented
altogether of what he had said to him, perceiving how foolishly he had
acted, as he might have revenged himself upon Camilla in some less
cruel and degrading way. He cursed his want of sense, condemned his
hasty resolution, and knew not what course to take to undo the
mischief or find some ready escape from it. At last he decided upon
revealing all to Camilla, and, as there was no want of opportunity for
doing so, he found her alone the same day; but she, as soon as she had
the chance of speaking to him, said, "Lothario my friend, I must tell
thee I have a sorrow in my heart which fills it so that it seems ready
to burst; and it will be a wonder if it does not; for the audacity of
Leonela has now reached such a pitch that every night she conceals a
gallant of hers in this house and remains with him till morning, at
the expense of my reputation; inasmuch as it is open to anyone to
question it who may see him quitting my house at such unseasonable
hours; but what distresses me is that I cannot punish or chide her,
for her privity to our intrigue bridles my mouth and keeps me silent
about hers, while I am dreading that some catastrophe will come of
it." As Camilla said this Lothario at first imagined it was some
device to delude him into the idea that the man he had seen going out
was Leonela's lover and not hers; but when he saw how she wept and
suffered, and begged him to help her, he became convinced of the
truth, and the conviction completed his confusion and remorse;
however, he told Camilla not to distress herself, as he would take
measures to put a stop to the insolence of Leonela. At the same time
he told her what, driven by the fierce rage of jealousy, he had said
to Anselmo, and how he had arranged to hide himself in the closet that
he might there see plainly how little she preserved her fidelity to
him; and he entreated her pardon for this madness, and her advice as
to how to repair it, and escape safely from the intricate labyrinth in
which his imprudence had involved him. Camilla was struck with alarm
at hearing what Lothario said, and with much anger, and great good
sense, she reproved him and rebuked his base design and the foolish
and mischievous resolution he had made; but as woman has by nature a
nimbler wit than man for good and for evil, though it is apt to fail
when she sets herself deliberately to reason, Camilla on the spur of
the moment thought of a way to remedy what was to all appearance
irremediable, and told Lothario to contrive that the next day Anselmo
should conceal himself in the place he mentioned, for she hoped from
his concealment to obtain the means of their enjoying themselves for
the future without any apprehension; and without revealing her purpose
to him entirely she charged him to be careful, as soon as Anselmo was
concealed, to come to her when Leonela should call him, and to all she
said to him to answer as he would have answered had he not known that
Anselmo was listening. Lothario pressed her to explain her intention
fully, so that he might with more certainty and precaution take care
to do what he saw to be needful. "I tell you," said Camilla, "there is
nothing to take care of except to answer me what I shall ask you;" for
she did not wish to explain to him beforehand what she meant to do,
fearing lest he should be unwilling to follow out an idea which seemed
to her such a good one, and should try or devise some other less
practicable plan. Lothario then retired, and the next day Anselmo,
under pretence of going to his friend's country house, took his
departure, and then returned to conceal himself, which he was able to
do easily, as Camilla and Leonela took care to give him the
opportunity; and so he placed himself in hiding in the state of
agitation that it may be imagined he would feel who expected to see
the vitals of his honour laid bare before his eyes, and found himself
on the point of losing the supreme blessing he thought he possessed in
his beloved Camilla. Having made sure of Anselmo's being in his
hiding-place, Camilla and Leonela entered the closet, and the instant
she set foot within it Camilla said, with a deep sigh, "Ah! dear
Leonela, would it not be better, before I do what I am unwilling you
should know lest you should seek to prevent it, that you should take
Anselmo's dagger that I have asked of you and with it pierce this vile
heart of mine? But no; there is no reason why I should conceal it from
you, while my servant here is taking off my armour I will tell you the
true state of the case, without leaving out anything. You must know,
senor, that I am called the bachelor Samson Carrasco. I am of the same
village as Don Quixote of La Mancha, whose craze and folly make all of
us who know him feel pity for him, and I am one of those who have felt
it most; and persuaded that his chance of recovery lay in quiet and
keeping at home and in his own house, I hit upon a device for keeping
him there. Three months ago, therefore, I went out to meet him as a
knight-errant, under the assumed name of the Knight of the Mirrors,
intending to engage him in combat and overcome him without hurting
him, making it the condition of our combat that the vanquished should
be at the disposal of the victor. What I meant to demand of him (for I
regarded him as vanquished already) was that he should return to his
own village, and not leave it for a whole year, by which time he might
be cured. But fate ordered it otherwise, for he vanquished me and
unhorsed me, and so my plan failed. He went his way, and I came back
conquered, covered with shame, and sorely bruised by my fall, which
was a particularly dangerous one. But this did not quench my desire to
meet him again and overcome him, as you have seen to-day. And as he is
so scrupulous in his observance of the laws of knight-errantry, he
will, no doubt, in order to keep his word, obey the injunction I have
laid upon him. This, senor, is how the matter stands, and I have
nothing more to tell you. I implore of you not to betray me, or tell
Don Quixote who I am; so that my honest endeavours may be successful,
and that a man of excellent wits--were he only rid of the fooleries of
chivalry--may get them back again." "O senor," said Don Antonio, "may
God forgive you the wrong you have done the whole world in trying to
bring the most amusing madman in it back to his senses. Do you not
see, senor, that the gain by Don Quixote's sanity can never equal the
enjoyment his crazes give? But my belief is that all the senor
bachelor's pains will be of no avail to bring a man so hopelessly
cracked to his senses again; and if it were not uncharitable, I would
say may Don Quixote never be cured, for by his recovery we lose not
only his own drolleries, but his squire Sancho Panza's too, any one of
which is enough to turn melancholy itself into merriment. However,
I'll hold my peace and say nothing to him, and we'll see whether I am
right in my suspicion that Senor Carrasco's efforts will be
fruitless." The bachelor replied that at all events the affair
promised well, and he hoped for a happy result from it; and putting
his services at Don Antonio's commands he took his leave of him; and
having had his armour packed at once upon a mule, he rode away from
the city the same day on the horse he rode to battle, and returned to
his own country without meeting any adventure calling for record in
this veracious history. Don Antonio reported to the viceroy what
Carrasco told him, and the viceroy was not very well pleased to hear
it, for with Don Quixote's retirement there was an end to the
amusement of all who knew anything of his mad doings. Six days did Don
Quixote keep his bed, dejected, melancholy, moody and out of sorts,
brooding over the unhappy event of his defeat. Sancho strove to
comfort him, and among other things he said to him, "Hold up your
head, senor, and be of good cheer if you can, and give thanks to
heaven that if you have had a tumble to the ground you have not come
off with a broken rib; and, as you know that 'where they give they
take,' and that 'there are not always fletches where there are pegs,'
a fig for the doctor, for there's no need of him to cure this ailment.
Let us go home, and give over going about in search of adventures in
strange lands and places; rightly looked at, it is I that am the
greater loser, though it is your worship that has had the worse usage.
With the government I gave up all wish to be a governor again, but I
did not give up all longing to be a count; and that will never come to
pass if your worship gives up becoming a king by renouncing the
calling of chivalry; and so my hopes are going to turn into smoke."
"Peace, Sancho," said Don Quixote; "thou seest my suspension and
retirement is not to exceed a year; I shall soon return to my honoured
calling, and I shall not be at a loss for a kingdom to win and a
county to bestow on thee." "May God hear it and sin be deaf," said
Sancho; "I have always heard say that 'a good hope is better than a
bad holding, and a good grievance better than a bad compensation. I
speak in this way, Sancho, to show you that I can shower down proverbs
just as well as yourself; and in short, I mean to say, and I do say,
that if you don't like to come on reward with me, and run the same
chance that I run, God be with you and make a saint of you; for I
shall find plenty of squires more obedient and painstaking, and not so
thickheaded or talkative as you are." When Sancho heard his master's
firm, resolute language, a cloud came over the sky with him and the
wings of his heart drooped, for he had made sure that his master would
not go without him for all the wealth of the world; and as he stood
there dumbfoundered and moody, Samson Carrasco came in with the
housekeeper and niece, who were anxious to hear by what arguments he
was about to dissuade their master from going to seek adventures. The
arch wag Samson came forward, and embracing him as he had done before,
said with a loud voice, "O flower of knight-errantry! O shining light
of arms! O honour and mirror of the Spanish nation! may God Almighty
in his infinite power grant that any person or persons, who would
impede or hinder thy third sally, may find no way out of the labyrinth
of their schemes, nor ever accomplish what they most desire!" And
then, turning to the housekeeper, he said, "Mistress housekeeper may
just as well give over saying the prayer of Santa Apollonia, for I
know it is the positive determination of the spheres that Senor Don
Quixote shall proceed to put into execution his new and lofty designs;
and I should lay a heavy burden on my conscience did I not urge and
persuade this knight not to keep the might of his strong arm and the
virtue of his valiant spirit any longer curbed and checked, for by his
inactivity he is defrauding the world of the redress of wrongs, of the
protection of orphans, of the honour of virgins, of the aid of widows,
and of the support of wives, and other matters of this kind
appertaining, belonging, proper and peculiar to the order of
knight-errantry. On, then, my lord Don Quixote, beautiful and brave,
let your worship and highness set out to-day rather than to-morrow;
and if anything be needed for the execution of your purpose, here am I
ready in person and purse to supply the want; and were it requisite to
attend your magnificence as squire, I should esteem it the happiest
good fortune." At this, Don Quixote, turning to Sancho, said, "Did I
not tell thee, Sancho, there would be squires enough and to spare for
me? See now who offers to become one; no less than the illustrious
bachelor Samson Carrasco, the perpetual joy and delight of the courts
of the Salamancan schools, sound in body, discreet, patient under heat
or cold, hunger or thirst, with all the qualifications requisite to
make a knight-errant's squire! But heaven forbid that, to gratify my
own inclination, I should shake or shatter this pillar of letters and
vessel of the sciences, and cut down this towering palm of the fair
and liberal arts. Let this new Samson remain in his own country, and,
bringing honour to it, bring honour at the same time on the grey heads
of his venerable parents; for I will be content with any squire that
comes to hand, as Sancho does not deign to accompany me." "I do
deign," said Sancho, deeply moved and with tears in his eyes,
pronounced the blessing upon them, and implored heaven to grant an
easy passage to the soul of the newly wedded man, who, the instant he
received the blessing, started nimbly to his feet and with
unparalleled effrontery pulled out the rapier that had been sheathed
in his body. All the bystanders were astounded, and some, more simple
than inquiring, began shouting, "A miracle, a miracle!" But Basilio
replied, "No miracle, no miracle; only a trick, a trick!" The priest,
perplexed and amazed, made haste to examine the wound with both hands,
and found that the blade had passed, not through Basilio's flesh and
ribs, but through a hollow iron tube full of blood, which he had
adroitly fixed at the place, the blood, as was afterwards ascertained,
having been so prepared as not to congeal. In short, the priest and
Camacho and most of those present saw they were tricked and made fools
of. The bride showed no signs of displeasure at the deception; on the
contrary, hearing them say that the marriage, being fraudulent, would
not be valid, she said that she confirmed it afresh, whence they all
concluded that the affair had been planned by agreement and
understanding between the pair, whereat Camacho and his supporters
were so mortified that they proceeded to revenge themselves by
violence, and a great number of them drawing their swords attacked
Basilio, in whose protection as many more swords were in an instant
unsheathed, while Don Quixote taking the lead on horseback, with his
lance over his arm and well covered with his shield, made all give way
before him. Sancho, who never found any pleasure or enjoyment in such
doings, retreated to the wine-jars from which he had taken his
delectable skimmings, considering that, as a holy place, that spot
would be respected. "Hold, sirs, hold!" cried Don Quixote in a loud
voice; "we have no right to take vengeance for wrongs that love may do
to us: remember love and war are the same thing, and as in war it is
allowable and common to make use of wiles and stratagems to overcome
the enemy, so in the contests and rivalries of love the tricks and
devices employed to attain the desired end are justifiable, provided
they be not to the discredit or dishonour of the loved object.
Quiteria belonged to Basilio and Basilio to Quiteria by the just and
beneficent disposal of heaven. Camacho is rich, and can purchase his
pleasure when, where, and as it pleases him. Basilio has but this
ewe-lamb, and no one, however powerful he may be, shall take her from
him; these two whom God hath joined man cannot separate; and he who
attempts it must first pass the point of this lance;" and so saying he
brandished it so stoutly and dexterously that he overawed all who did
not know him. But so deep an impression had the rejection of Quiteria
made on Camacho's mind that it banished her at once from his thoughts;
and so the counsels of the priest, who was a wise and kindly disposed
man, prevailed with him, and by their means he and his partisans were
pacified and tranquillised, and to prove it put up their swords again,
inveighing against the pliancy of Quiteria rather than the craftiness
of Basilio; Camacho maintaining that, if Quiteria as a maiden had such
a love for Basilio, she would have loved him too as a married woman,
and that he ought to thank heaven more for having taken her than for
having given her. Camacho and those of his following, therefore, being
consoled and pacified, those on Basilio's side were appeased; and the
rich Camacho, to show that he felt no resentment for the trick, and
did not care about it, desired the festival to go on just as if he
were married in reality. Neither Basilio, however, nor his bride, nor
their followers would take any part in it, and they withdrew to
Basilio's village; for the poor, if they are persons of virtue and
good sense, have those who follow, honour, and uphold them, just as
the rich have those who flatter and dance attendance on them. With
them they carried Don Quixote, regarding him as a man of worth and a
stout one. Sancho alone had a cloud on his soul, for he found himself
debarred from waiting for Camacho's splendid feast and festival, which
lasted until night; and thus dragged away, he moodily followed his
master, who accompanied Basilio's party, and left behind him the
flesh-pots of Egypt; though in his heart he took them with him, and
their now nearly finished skimmings that he carried in the bucket
conjured up visions before his eyes of the glory and abundance of the
good cheer he was losing. And so, vexed and dejected though not
hungry, without dismounting from Dapple he followed in the footsteps
of Rocinante. CHAPTER XXII. WHERIN IS RELATED THE GRAND ADVENTURE OF
THE CAVE OF MONTESINOS IN THE HEART OF LA MANCHA, WHICH THE VALIANT
DON QUIXOTE BROUGHT TO A HAPPY TERMINATION CHAPTER XXIII OF THE
WONDERFUL THINGS THE INCOMPARABLE DON QUIXOTE SAID HE SAW IN THE
PROFOUND CAVE OF MONTESINOS, THE IMPOSSIBILITY AND MAGNITUDE OF WHICH
CAUSE THIS ADVENTURE TO BE DEEMED APOCRYPHAL CHAPTER XXIV WHEREIN ARE
RELATED A THOUSAND TRIFLING MATTERS, AS TRIVIAL AS THEY ARE NECESSARY
TO THE RIGHT UNDERSTANDING OF THIS GREAT HISTORY CHAPTER XXV WHEREIN
IS SET DOWN THE BRAYING ADVENTURE, AND THE DROLL ONE OF THE
PUPPET-SHOWMAN, TOGETHER WITH THE MEMORABLE DIVINATIONS OF THE
DIVINING APE Don Quixote's bread would not bake, as the common saying
is, until he had heard and learned the curious things promised by the
man who carried the arms. He went to seek him where the innkeeper said
he was and having found him, bade him say now at any rate what he had
to say in answer to the question he had asked him on the road. "The
tale of my wonders must be taken more leisurely and not standing,"
said the man; "let me finish foddering my beast, good sir; and then
I'll tell you things that will astonish you." "Don't wait for that,"
said Don Quixote; "I'll help you in everything," and so he did,
sifting the barley for him and cleaning out the manger; a degree of
humility which made the other feel bound to tell him with a good grace
what he had asked; so seating himself on a bench, with Don Quixote
beside him, and the cousin, the page, Sancho Panza, and the landlord,
for a senate and an audience, he began his story in this way: "You
must know that in a village four leagues and a half from this inn, it
so happened that one of the regidors, by the tricks and roguery of a
servant girl of his (it's too long a tale to tell), lost an ass; and
though he did all he possibly could to find it, it was all to no
purpose. A fortnight might have gone by, so the story goes, since the
ass had been missing, when, as the regidor who had lost it was
standing in the plaza, another regidor of the same town said to him,
'Pay me for good news, gossip; your ass has turned up.' 'That I will,
and well, gossip,' said the other; 'but tell us, where has he turned
up?' 'In the forest,' said the finder; 'I saw him this morning without
pack-saddle or harness of any sort, and so lean that it went to one's
heart to see him. I tried to drive him before me and bring him to you,
but he is already so wild and shy that when I went near him he made
off into the thickest part of the forest. If you have a mind that we
two should go back and look for him, let me put up this she-ass at my
house and I'll be back at once.' 'You will be doing me a great
kindness,' said the owner of the ass, 'and I'll try to pay it back in
the same coin.' It is with all these circumstances, and in the very
same way I am telling it now, that those who know all about the matter
tell the story. Well then, the two regidors set off on foot, arm in
arm, for the forest, and coming to the place where they hoped to find
the ass they could not find him, nor was he to be seen anywhere about,
search as they might. Seeing, then, that there was no sign of him, the
regidor who had seen him said to the other, 'Look here, gossip; a plan
has occurred to me, by which, beyond a doubt, we shall manage to
discover the animal, even if he is stowed away in the bowels of the
earth, not to say the forest. Here it is. I can bray to perfection,
and if you can ever so little, the thing's as good as done.' 'Ever so
little did you say, gossip?' said the other; 'by God, I'll not give in
to anybody, not even to the asses themselves.' 'We'll soon see,' said
the second regidor, 'for my plan is that you should go one side of the
forest, and I the other, so as to go all round about it; and every now
and then you will bray and I will bray; and it cannot be but that the
ass will hear us, and answer us if he is in the forest.' To which the
owner of the ass replied, 'It's an excellent plan, I declare, gossip,
and worthy of your great genius;' and the two separating as agreed, it
so fell out that they brayed almost at the same moment, and each,
deceived by the braying of the other, ran to look, fancying the ass
had turned up at last. When they came in sight of one another, said
the loser, 'Is it possible, gossip, that it was not my ass that
brayed?' 'No, it was I,' said the other. 'Well then, I can tell you,
gossip,' said the ass's owner, 'that between you and an ass there is
not an atom of difference as far as braying goes, for I never in all
my life saw or heard anything more natural.' 'Those praises and
compliments belong to you more justly than to me, gossip,' said the
inventor of the plan; 'for, by the God that made me, you might give a
couple of brays odds to the best and most finished brayer in the
world; the tone you have got is deep, your voice is well kept up as to
time and pitch, and your finishing notes come thick and fast; in fact,
I own myself beaten, and yield the palm to you, and give in to you in
this rare accomplishment.' 'Well then,' said the owner, 'I'll set a
higher value on myself for the future, and consider that I know
something, as I have an excellence of some sort; for though I always
thought I brayed well, I never supposed I came up to the pitch of
perfection you say.' 'And I say too,' said the second, 'that there are
rare gifts going to loss in the world, and that they are ill bestowed
upon those who don't know how to make use of them.' 'Ours,' said the
owner of the ass, 'unless it is in cases like this we have now in
hand, cannot be of any service to us, and even in this God grant they
may be of some use.' So saying they separated, and took to their
braying once more, but every instant they were deceiving one another,
and coming to meet one another again, until they arranged by way of
countersign, so as to know that it was they and not the ass, to give
two brays, one after the other. In this way, doubling the brays at
every step, they made the complete circuit of the forest, but the lost
ass never gave them an answer or even the sign of one. How could the
poor ill-starred brute have answered, when, in the thickest part of
the forest, they found him devoured by wolves? As soon as he saw him
his owner said, 'I was wondering he did not answer, for if he wasn't
dead he'd have brayed when he heard us, or he'd have been no ass; but
for the sake of having heard you bray to such perfection, gossip, I
count the trouble I have taken to look for him well bestowed, even
though I have found him dead.' 'It's in a good hand, gossip,' said the
other; 'if the abbot sings well, the acolyte is not much behind him.'
So they returned disconsolate and hoarse to their village, where they
told their friends, neighbours, and acquaintances what had befallen
them in their search for the ass, each crying up the other's
perfection in braying. The whole story came to be known and spread
abroad through the villages of the neighbourhood; and the devil, who
never sleeps, with his love for sowing dissensions and scattering
discord everywhere, blowing mischief about and making quarrels out of
nothing, contrived to make the people of the other towns fall to
braying whenever they saw anyone from our village, as if to throw the
braying of our regidors in our teeth. Then the boys took to it, which
was the same thing for it as getting into the hands and mouths of all
the devils of hell; and braying spread from one town to another in
such a way that the men of the braying town are as easy to be known as
blacks are to be known from whites, and the unlucky joke has gone so
far that several times the scoffed have come out in arms and in a body
to do battle with the scoffers, and neither king nor rook, fear nor
shame, can mend matters. To-morrow or the day after, I believe, the
men of my town, that is, of the braying town, are going to take the
field against another village two leagues away from ours, one of those
that persecute us most; and that we may turn out well prepared I have
bought these lances and halberds you have seen. These are the curious
things I told you I had to tell, and if you don't think them so, I
have got no others;" and with this the worthy fellow brought his story
to a close. Just at this moment there came in at the gate of the inn a
man entirely clad in chamois leather, hose, breeches, and doublet, who
said in a loud voice, "Senor host, have you room? Here's the divining
ape and the show of the Release of Melisendra just coming." "Ods
body!" said the landlord, "why, it's Master Pedro! We're in for a
grand night!" I forgot to mention that the said Master Pedro had his
left eye and nearly half his cheek covered with a patch of green
taffety, showing that something ailed all that side. "Your worship is
welcome, Master Pedro," continued the landlord; "but where are the ape
and the show, for I don't see them?" "They are close at hand," said he
in the chamois leather, "but I came on first to know if there was any
room." "I'd make the Duke of Alva himself clear out to make room for
Master Pedro," said the landlord; "bring in the ape and the show;
there's company in the inn to-night that will pay to see that and the
cleverness of the ape." "So be it by all means," said the duchess;
"tomorrow I'll give you a scourge that will be just the thing for you,
and will accommodate itself to the tenderness of your flesh, as if it
was its own sister." Then said Sancho, "Your highness must know, dear
lady of my soul, that I have a letter written to my wife, Teresa
Panza, giving her an account of all that has happened me since I left
her; I have it here in my bosom, and there's nothing wanting but to
put the address to it; I'd be glad if your discretion would read it,
for I think it runs in the governor style; I mean the way governors
ought to write." "And who dictated it?" asked the duchess. "Who should
have dictated but myself, sinner as I am?" said Sancho. "And did you
write it yourself?" said the duchess. "That I didn't," said Sancho;
"for I can neither read nor write, though I can sign my name." "Let us
see it," said the duchess, "for never fear but you display in it the
quality and quantity of your wit." Sancho drew out an open letter from
his bosom, and the duchess, taking it, found it ran in this fashion:
SANCHO PANZA'S LETTER TO HIS WIFE, TERESA PANZA If I was well whipped
I went mounted like a gentleman; if I have got a good government it is
at the cost of a good whipping. Thou wilt not understand this just
now, my Teresa; by-and-by thou wilt know what it means. I may tell
thee, Teresa, I mean thee to go in a coach, for that is a matter of
importance, because every other way of going is going on all-fours.
Thou art a governor's wife; take care that nobody speaks evil of thee
behind thy back. I send thee here a green hunting suit that my lady
the duchess gave me; alter it so as to make a petticoat and bodice for
our daughter. Don Quixote, my master, if I am to believe what I hear
in these parts, is a madman of some sense, and a droll blockhead, and
I am no way behind him. We have been in the cave of Montesinos, and
the sage Merlin has laid hold of me for the disenchantment of Dulcinea
del Toboso, her that is called Aldonza Lorenzo over there. With three
thousand three hundred lashes, less five, that I'm to give myself, she
will be left as entirely disenchanted as the mother that bore her. Say
nothing of this to anyone; for, make thy affairs public, and some will
say they are white and others will say they are black. I shall leave
this in a few days for my government, to which I am going with a
mighty great desire to make money, for they tell me all new governors
set out with the same desire; I will feel the pulse of it and will let
thee know if thou art to come and live with me or not. Dapple is well
and sends many remembrances to thee; I am not going to leave him
behind though they took me away to be Grand Turk. My lady the duchess
kisses thy hands a thousand times; do thou make a return with two
thousand, for as my master says, nothing costs less or is cheaper than
civility. God has not been pleased to provide another valise for me
with another hundred crowns, like the one the other day; but never
mind, my Teresa, the bell-ringer is in safe quarters, and all will
come out in the scouring of the government; only it troubles me
greatly what they tell me--that once I have tasted it I will eat my
hands off after it; and if that is so it will not come very cheap to
me; though to be sure the maimed have a benefice of their own in the
alms they beg for; so that one way or another thou wilt be rich and in
luck. God give it to thee as he can, and keep me to serve thee. From
this castle, the 20th of July, 1614. Thy husband, the governor. SANCHO
PANZA When she had done reading the letter the duchess said to Sancho,
"On two points the worthy governor goes rather astray; one is in
saying or hinting that this government has been bestowed upon him for
the lashes that he is to give himself, when he knows (and he cannot
deny it) that when my lord the duke promised it to him nobody ever
dreamt of such a thing as lashes; the other is that he shows himself
here to be very covetous; and I would not have him a money-seeker, for
'covetousness bursts the bag,' and the covetous governor does
ungoverned justice." "I don't mean it that way, senora," said Sancho;
"and if you think the letter doesn't run as it ought to do, it's only
to tear it up and make another; and maybe it will be a worse one if it
is left to my gumption." "No, no," said the duchess, "this one will
do, and I wish the duke to see it." With this they betook themselves
to a garden where they were to dine, and the duchess showed Sancho's
letter to the duke, who was highly delighted with it. They dined, and
after the cloth had been removed and they had amused themselves for a
while with Sancho's rich conversation, the melancholy sound of a fife
and harsh discordant drum made itself heard. All seemed somewhat put
out by this dull, confused, martial harmony, especially Don Quixote,
who could not keep his seat from pure disquietude; as to Sancho, it is
needless to say that fear drove him to his usual refuge, the side or
the skirts of the duchess; and indeed and in truth the sound they
heard was a most doleful and melancholy one. While they were still in
uncertainty they saw advancing towards them through the garden two men
clad in mourning robes so long and flowing that they trailed upon the
ground. As they marched they beat two great drums which were likewise
draped in black, and beside them came the fife player, black and
sombre like the others. Following these came a personage of gigantic
stature enveloped rather than clad in a gown of the deepest black, the
skirt of which was of prodigious dimensions. Over the gown, girdling
or crossing his figure, he had a broad baldric which was also black,
and from which hung a huge scimitar with a black scabbard and
furniture. He had his face covered with a transparent black veil,
through which might be descried a very long beard as white as snow. He
came on keeping step to the sound of the drums with great gravity and
dignity; and, in short, his stature, his gait, the sombreness of his
appearance and his following might well have struck with astonishment,
as they did, all who beheld him without knowing who he was. With this
measured pace and in this guise he advanced to kneel before the duke,
who, with the others, awaited him standing. The duke, however, would
not on any account allow him to speak until he had risen. The
prodigious scarecrow obeyed, and standing up, removed the veil from
his face and disclosed the most enormous, the longest, the whitest and
the thickest beard that human eyes had ever beheld until that moment,
and then fetching up a grave, sonorous voice from the depths of his
broad, capacious chest, and fixing his eyes on the duke, he said:
"Most high and mighty senor, my name is Trifaldin of the White Beard;
I am squire to the Countess Trifaldi, otherwise called the Distressed
Duenna, on whose behalf I bear a message to your highness, which is
that your magnificence will be pleased to grant her leave and
permission to come and tell you her trouble, which is one of the
strangest and most wonderful that the mind most familiar with trouble
in the world could have imagined; but first she desires to know if the
valiant and never vanquished knight, Don Quixote of La Mancha, is in
this your castle, for she has come in quest of him on foot and without
breaking her fast from the kingdom of Kandy to your realms here; a
thing which may and ought to be regarded as a miracle or set down to
enchantment; she is even now at the gate of this fortress or
plaisance, and only waits for your permission to enter. I have
spoken." And with that he coughed, and stroked down his beard with
both his hands, and stood very tranquilly waiting for the response of
the duke, which was to this effect: "Many days ago, worthy squire
Trifaldin of the White Beard, we heard of the misfortune of my lady
the Countess Trifaldi, whom the enchanters have caused to be called
the Distressed Duenna. Bid her enter, O stupendous squire, and tell
her that the valiant knight Don Quixote of La Mancha is here, and from
his generous disposition she may safely promise herself every
protection and assistance; and you may tell her, too, that if my aid
be necessary it will not be withheld, for I am bound to give it to her
by my quality of knight, which involves the protection of women of all
sorts, especially widowed, wronged, and distressed dames, such as her
ladyship seems to be." On hearing this Trifaldin bent the knee to the
ground, and making a sign to the fifer and drummers to strike up, he
turned and marched out of the garden to the same notes and at the same
pace as when he entered, leaving them all amazed at his bearing and
solemnity. Turning to Don Quixote, the duke said, "After all, renowned
knight, the mists of malice and ignorance are unable to hide or
obscure the light of valour and virtue. I say so, because your
excellence has been barely six days in this castle, and already the
unhappy and the afflicted come in quest of you from lands far distant
and remote, and not in coaches or on dromedaries, but on foot and
fasting, confident that in that mighty arm they will find a cure for
their sorrows and troubles; thanks to your great achievements, which
are circulated all over the known earth." "I wish, senor duke,"
replied Don Quixote, "that blessed ecclesiastic, who at table the
other day showed such ill-will and bitter spite against
knights-errant, were here now to see with his own eyes whether knights
of the sort are needed in the world; he would at any rate learn by
experience that those suffering any extraordinary affliction or
sorrow, in extreme cases and unusual misfortunes do not go to look for
a remedy to the houses of jurists or village sacristans, or to the
knight who has never attempted to pass the bounds of his own town, or
to the indolent courtier who only seeks for news to repeat and talk
of, instead of striving to do deeds and exploits for others to relate
and record. Relief in distress, help in need, protection for damsels,
consolation for widows, are to be found in no sort of persons better
than in knights-errant; and I give unceasing thanks to heaven that I
am one, and regard any misfortune or suffering that may befall me in
the pursuit of so honourable a calling as endured to good purpose. Let
this duenna come and ask what she will, for I will effect her relief
by the might of my arm and the dauntless resolution of my bold heart."
CHAPTER XXXVII. WHEREIN IS CONTINUED THE NOTABLE ADVENTURE OF THE
DISTRESSED DUENNA CHAPTER XXXVIII WHEREIN IS TOLD THE DISTRESSED
DUENNA'S TALE OF HER MISFORTUNES CHAPTER XXXIX IN WHICH THE TRIFALDI
CONTINUES HER MARVELLOUS AND MEMORABLE STORY CHAPTER XL OF MATTERS
RELATING AND BELONGING TO THIS ADVENTURE AND TO THIS MEMORABLE HISTORY
Verily and truly all those who find pleasure in histories like this
ought show their gratitude to Cide Hamete, its original author, for
the scrupulous care he has taken to set before us all its minute
particulars, not leaving anything, however trifling it may be, that he
does not make clear and plain. He portrays the thoughts, he reveals
the fancies, he answers implied questions, clears up doubts, sets
objections at rest, and, in a word, makes plain the smallest points
the most inquisitive can desire to know. O renowned author! O happy
Don Quixote! O famous famous droll Sancho! All and each, may ye live
countless ages for the delight and amusement of the dwellers on earth!
The history goes on to say that when Sancho saw the Distressed One
faint he exclaimed: "I swear by the faith of an honest man and the
shades of all my ancestors the Panzas, that never I did see or hear
of, nor has my master related or conceived in his mind, such an
adventure as this. A thousand devils--not to curse thee--take thee,
Malambruno, for an enchanter and a giant! Couldst thou find no other
sort of punishment for these sinners but bearding them? Would it not
have been better--it would have been better for them--to have taken
off half their noses from the middle upwards, even though they'd have
snuffled when they spoke, than to have put beards on them? I'll bet
they have not the means of paying anybody to shave them." "That is the
truth, senor," said one of the twelve; "we have not the money to get
ourselves shaved, and so we have, some of us, taken to using
sticking-plasters by way of an economical remedy, for by applying them
to our faces and plucking them off with a jerk we are left as bare and
smooth as the bottom of a stone mortar. There are, to be sure, women
in Kandy that go about from house to house to remove down, and trim
eyebrows, and make cosmetics for the use of the women, but we, the
duennas of my lady, would never let them in, for most of them have a
flavour of agents that have ceased to be principals; and if we are not
relieved by Senor Don Quixote we shall be carried to our graves with
beards." "I will pluck out my own in the land of the Moors," said Don
Quixote, "if I don't cure yours." At this instant the Trifaldi
recovered from her swoon and said, "The chink of that promise, valiant
knight, reached my ears in the midst of my swoon, and has been the
means of reviving me and bringing back my senses; and so once more I
implore you, illustrious errant, indomitable sir, to let your gracious
promises be turned into deeds." "There shall be no delay on my part,"
said Don Quixote. "Bethink you, senora, of what I must do, for my
heart is most eager to serve you." "The fact is," replied the
Distressed One, "it is five thousand leagues, a couple more or less,
from this to the kingdom of Kandy, if you go by land; but if you go
through the air and in a straight line, it is three thousand two
hundred and twenty-seven. You must know, too, that Malambruno told me
that, whenever fate provided the knight our deliverer, he himself
would send him a steed far better and with less tricks than a
post-horse; for he will be that same wooden horse on which the valiant
Pierres carried off the fair Magalona; which said horse is guided by a
peg he has in his forehead that serves for a bridle, and flies through
the air with such rapidity that you would fancy the very devils were
carrying him. This horse, according to ancient tradition, was made by
Merlin. He lent him to Pierres, who was a friend of his, and who made
long journeys with him, and, as has been said, carried off the fair
Magalona, bearing her through the air on its haunches and making all
who beheld them from the earth gape with astonishment; and he never
lent him save to those whom he loved or those who paid him well; and
since the great Pierres we know of no one having mounted him until
now. From him Malambruno stole him by his magic art, and he has him
now in his possession, and makes use of him in his journeys which he
constantly makes through different parts of the world; he is here
to-day, to-morrow in France, and the next day in Potosi; and the best
of it is the said horse neither eats nor sleeps nor wears out shoes,
and goes at an ambling pace through the air without wings, so that he
whom he has mounted upon him can carry a cup full of water in his hand
without spilling a drop, so smoothly and easily does he go, for which
reason the fair Magalona enjoyed riding him greatly." "For going
smoothly and easily," said Sancho at this, "give me my Dapple, though
he can't go through the air; but on the ground I'll back him against
all the amblers in the world." They all laughed, and the Distressed
One continued: "And this same horse, if so be that Malambruno is
disposed to put an end to our sufferings, will be here before us ere
the night shall have advanced half an hour; for he announced to me
that the sign he would give me whereby I might know that I had found
the knight I was in quest of, would be to send me the horse wherever
he might be, speedily and promptly." "And how many is there room for
on this horse?" asked Sancho. "Two," said the Distressed One, "one in
the saddle, and the other on the croup; and generally these two are
knight and squire, when there is no damsel that's being carried off."
"I'd like to know, Senora Distressed One," said Sancho, "what is the
name of this horse?" "His name," said the Distressed One, "is not the
same as Bellerophon's horse that was called Pegasus, or Alexander the
Great's, called Bucephalus, or Orlando Furioso's, the name of which
was Brigliador, nor yet Bayard, the horse of Reinaldos of Montalvan,
nor Frontino like Ruggiero's, nor Bootes or Peritoa, as they say the
horses of the sun were called, nor is he called Orelia, like the horse
on which the unfortunate Rodrigo, the last king of the Goths, rode to
the battle where he lost his life and his kingdom." "I'll bet," said
Sancho, "that as they have given him none of these famous names of
well-known horses, no more have they given him the name of my master's
Rocinante, which for being apt surpasses all that have been
mentioned." "That is true," said the bearded countess, "still it fits
him very well, for he is called Clavileno the Swift, which name is in
accordance with his being made of wood, with the peg he has in his
forehead, and with the swift pace at which he travels; and so, as far
as name goes, he may compare with the famous Rocinante." "I have
nothing to say against his name," said Sancho; "but with what sort of
bridle or halter is he managed?" "I have said already," said the
Trifaldi, "that it is with a peg, by turning which to one side or the
other the knight who rides him makes him go as he pleases, either
through the upper air, or skimming and almost sweeping the earth, or
else in that middle course that is sought and followed in all
well-regulated proceedings." "I'd like to see him," said Sancho; "but
to fancy I'm going to mount him, either in the saddle or on the croup,
is to ask pears of the elm tree. A good joke indeed! I can hardly keep
my seat upon Dapple, and on a pack-saddle softer than silk itself, and
here they'd have me hold on upon haunches of plank without pad or
cushion of any sort! Gad, I have no notion of bruising myself to get
rid of anyone's beard; let each one shave himself as best he can; I'm
not going to accompany my master on any such long journey; besides, I
can't give any help to the shaving of these beards as I can to the
disenchantment of my lady Dulcinea." "Yes, you can, my friend,"
replied the Trifaldi; "and so much, that without you, so I understand,
we shall be able to do nothing." "In the king's name!" exclaimed
Sancho, "what have squires got to do with the adventures of their
masters? Are they to have the fame of such as they go through, and we
the labour? Body o' me! if the historians would only say, 'Such and
such a knight finished such and such an adventure, but with the help
of so and so, his squire, without which it would have been impossible
for him to avoid falling into it. He pulled him up, however, without a
fall, and coming a little closer examined the hole without
dismounting; but as he was looking at it he heard loud cries
proceeding from it, and by listening attentively was able to make out
that he who uttered them was saying, "Ho, above there! is there any
Christian that hears me, or any charitable gentleman that will take
pity on a sinner buried alive, on an unfortunate disgoverned
governor?" It struck Don Quixote that it was the voice of Sancho Panza
he heard, whereat he was taken aback and amazed, and raising his own
voice as much as he could, he cried out, "Who is below there? Who is
that complaining?" "Who should be here, or who should complain," was
the answer, "but the forlorn Sancho Panza, for his sins and for his
ill-luck governor of the island of Barataria, squire that was to the
famous knight Don Quixote of La Mancha, and made him confess that my
Casildea is more beautiful than his Dulcinea; and in this one victory
I hold myself to have conquered all the knights in the world; for this
Don Quixote that I speak of has vanquished them all, and I having
vanquished him, his glory, his fame, and his honour have passed and
are transferred to my person; for The more the vanquished hath of fair
renown, The greater glory gilds the victor's crown. Thus the
innumerable achievements of the said Don Quixote are now set down to
my account and have become mine." Don Quixote was amazed when he heard
the Knight of the Grove, and was a thousand times on the point of
telling him he lied, and had the lie direct already on the tip of his
tongue; but he restrained himself as well as he could, in order to
force him to confess the lie with his own lips; so he said to him
quietly, "As to what you say, sir knight, about having vanquished most
of the knights of Spain, or even of the whole world, I say nothing;
but that you have vanquished Don Quixote of La Mancha I consider
doubtful; it may have been some other that resembled him, although
there are few like him." "How! not vanquished?" said he of the Grove;
"by the heaven that is above us I fought Don Quixote and overcame him
and made him yield; and he is a man of tall stature, gaunt features,
long, lank limbs, with hair turning grey, an aquiline nose rather
hooked, and large black drooping moustaches; he does battle under the
name of 'The Countenance,' and he has for squire a peasant called
Sancho Panza; he presses the loins and rules the reins of a famous
steed called Rocinante; and lastly, he has for the mistress of his
will a certain Dulcinea del Toboso, once upon a time called Aldonza
Lorenzo, just as I call mine Casildea de Vandalia because her name is
Casilda and she is of Andalusia. If all these tokens are not enough to
vindicate the truth of what I say, here is Don Quixote himself, who
will maintain it by arms, on foot or on horseback or in any way you
please." And so saying he stood up and laid his hand on his sword,
waiting to see what the Knight of the Grove would do, who in an
equally calm voice said in reply, "Pledges don't distress a good
payer; he who has succeeded in vanquishing you once when transformed,
Sir Don Quixote, may fairly hope to subdue you in your own proper
shape; but as it is not becoming for knights to perform their feats of
arms in the dark, like highwaymen and bullies, let us wait till
daylight, that the sun may behold our deeds; and the conditions of our
combat shall be that the vanquished shall be at the victor's disposal,
to do all that he may enjoin, provided the injunction be such as shall
be becoming a knight." "I am more than satisfied with these conditions
and terms," replied Don Quixote; and so saying, they betook themselves
to where their squires lay, and found them snoring, and in the same
posture they were in when sleep fell upon them. They roused them up,
and bade them get the horses ready, as at sunrise they were to engage
in a bloody and arduous single combat; at which intelligence Sancho
was aghast and thunderstruck, trembling for the safety of his master
because of the mighty deeds he had heard the squire of the Grove
ascribe to his; but without a word the two squires went in quest of
their cattle; for by this time the three horses and the ass had smelt
one another out, and were all together. On the way, he of the Grove
said to Sancho, "A hard life it is we lead and live, senor, we that
are squires to knights-errant; verily, we eat our bread in the sweat
of our faces, which is one of the curses God laid on our first
parents." "It may be said, too," added Sancho, "that we eat it in the
chill of our bodies; for who gets more heat and cold than the
miserable squires of knight-errantry? Even so it would not be so bad
if we had something to eat, for woes are lighter if there's bread; but
sometimes we go a day or two without breaking our fast, except with
the wind that blows." "All that," said he of the Grove, "may be
endured and put up with when we have hopes of reward; for, unless the
knight-errant he serves is excessively unlucky, after a few turns the
squire will at least find himself rewarded with a fine government of
some island or some fair county." "I," said Sancho, "have already told
my master that I shall be content with the government of some island,
and he is so noble and generous that he has promised it to me ever so
many times." "I," said he of the Grove, "shall be satisfied with a
canonry for my services, and my master has already assigned me one."
"Your master," said Sancho, "no doubt is a knight in the Church line,
and can bestow rewards of that sort on his good squire; but mine is
only a layman; though I remember some clever, but, to my mind,
designing people, strove to persuade him to try and become an
archbishop. He, however, would not be anything but an emperor; but I
was trembling all the time lest he should take a fancy to go into the
Church, not finding myself fit to hold office in it; for I may tell
you, though I seem a man, I am no better than a beast for the Church."
"Well, then, you are wrong there," said he of the Grove; "for those
island governments are not all satisfactory; some are awkward, some
are poor, some are dull, and, in short, the highest and choicest
brings with it a heavy burden of cares and troubles which the unhappy
wight to whose lot it has fallen bears upon his shoulders. Far better
would it be for us who have adopted this accursed service to go back
to our own houses, and there employ ourselves in pleasanter
occupations--in hunting or fishing, for instance; for what squire in
the world is there so poor as not to have a hack and a couple of
greyhounds and a fishingrod to amuse himself with in his own village?"
"I am not in want of any of those things," said Sancho; "to be sure I
have no hack, but I have an ass that is worth my master's horse twice
over; God send me a bad Easter, and that the next one I am to see, if
I would swap, even if I got four bushels of barley to boot. You will
laugh at the value I put on my Dapple--for dapple is the colour of my
beast. As to greyhounds, I can't want for them, for there are enough
and to spare in my town; and, moreover, there is more pleasure in
sport when it is at other people's expense." "In truth and earnest,
sir squire," said he of the Grove, "I have made up my mind and
determined to have done with these drunken vagaries of these knights,
and go back to my village, and bring up my children; for I have three,
like three Oriental pearls." "I have two," said Sancho, "that might be
presented before the Pope himself, especially a girl whom I am
breeding up for a countess, please God, though in spite of her
mother." "And how old is this lady that is being bred up for a
countess?" asked he of the Grove. "Fifteen, a couple of years more or
less," answered Sancho; "but she is as tall as a lance, and as fresh
as an April morning, and as strong as a porter." "Those are gifts to
fit her to be not only a countess but a nymph of the greenwood," said
he of the Grove; "whoreson strumpet! what pith the rogue must have!"
To which Sancho made answer, somewhat sulkily, "She's no strumpet, nor
was her mother, nor will either of them be, please God, while I live;
speak more civilly; for one bred up among knights-errant, who are
courtesy itself, your words don't seem to me to be very becoming." "O
how little you know about compliments, sir squire," returned he of the
Grove. "What! don't you know that when a horseman delivers a good
lance thrust at the bull in the plaza, or when anyone does anything
very well, the people are wont to say, 'Ha, whoreson rip! how well he
has done it!' and that what seems to be abuse in the expression is
high praise? Disown sons and daughters, senor, who don't do what
deserves that compliments of this sort should be paid to their
parents." "I do disown them," replied Sancho, "and in this way, and by
the same reasoning, you might call me and my children and my wife all
the strumpets in the world, for all they do and say is of a kind that
in the highest degree deserves the same praise; and to see them again
I pray God to deliver me from mortal sin, or, what comes to the same
thing, to deliver me from this perilous calling of squire into which I
have fallen a second time, decayed and beguiled by a purse with a
hundred ducats that I found one day in the heart of the Sierra Morena;
and the devil is always putting a bag full of doubloons before my
eyes, here, there, everywhere, until I fancy at every stop I am
putting my hand on it, and hugging it, and carrying it home with me,
and making investments, and getting interest, and living like a
prince; and so long as I think of this I make light of all the
hardships I endure with this simpleton of a master of mine, who, I
well know, is more of a madman than a knight." "There's why they say
that 'covetousness bursts the bag,'" said he of the Grove; "but if you
come to talk of that sort, there is not a greater one in the world
than my master, for he is one of those of whom they say, 'the cares of
others kill the ass;' for, in order that another knight may recover
the senses he has lost, he makes a madman of himself and goes looking
for what, when found, may, for all I know, fly in his own face." "And
is he in love perchance?" asked Sancho. "He is," said of the Grove,
"with one Casildea de Vandalia, the rawest and best roasted lady the
whole world could produce; but that rawness is not the only foot he
limps on, for he has greater schemes rumbling in his bowels, as will
be seen before many hours are over." "There's no road so smooth but it
has some hole or hindrance in it," said Sancho; "in other houses they
cook beans, but in mine it's by the potful; madness will have more
followers and hangers-on than sound sense; but if there be any truth
in the common saying, that to have companions in trouble gives some
relief, I may take consolation from you, inasmuch as you serve a
master as crazy as my own." "Crazy but valiant," replied he of the
Grove, "and more roguish than crazy or valiant." "Mine is not that,"
said Sancho; "I mean he has nothing of the rogue in him; on the
contrary, he has the soul of a pitcher; he has no thought of doing
harm to anyone, only good to all, nor has he any malice whatever in
him; a child might persuade him that it is night at noonday; and for
this simplicity I love him as the core of my heart, and I can't bring
myself to leave him, let him do ever such foolish things." "For all
that, brother and senor," said he of the Grove, "if the blind lead the
blind, both are in danger of falling into the pit. It is better for us
to beat a quiet retreat and get back to our own quarters; for those
who seek adventures don't always find good ones." Sancho kept spitting
from time to time, and his spittle seemed somewhat ropy and dry,
observing which the compassionate squire of the Grove said, "It seems
to me that with all this talk of ours our tongues are sticking to the
roofs of our mouths; but I have a pretty good loosener hanging from
the saddle-bow of my horse," and getting up he came back the next
minute with a large bota of wine and a pasty half a yard across; and
this is no exaggeration, for it was made of a house rabbit so big that
Sancho, as he handled it, took it to be made of a goat, not to say a
kid, and looking at it he said, "And do you carry this with you,
senor?" "Why, what are you thinking about?" said the other; "do you
take me for some paltry squire? I carry a better larder on my horse's
croup than a general takes with him when he goes on a march." Sancho
ate without requiring to be pressed, and in the dark bolted mouthfuls
like the knots on a tether, and said he, "You are a proper trusty
squire, one of the right sort, sumptuous and grand, as this banquet
shows, which, if it has not come here by magic art, at any rate has
the look of it; not like me, unlucky beggar, that have nothing more in
my alforjas than a scrap of cheese, so hard that one might brain a
giant with it, and, to keep it company, a few dozen carobs and as many
more filberts and walnuts; thanks to the austerity of my master, and
the idea he has and the rule he follows, that knights-errant must not
live or sustain themselves on anything except dried fruits and the
herbs of the field." "By my faith, brother," said he of the Grove, "my
stomach is not made for thistles, or wild pears, or roots of the
woods; let our masters do as they like, with their chivalry notions
and laws, and eat what those enjoin; I carry my prog-basket and this
bota hanging to the saddle-bow, whatever they may say; and it is such
an object of worship with me, and I love it so, that there is hardly a
moment but I am kissing and embracing it over and over again;" and so
saying he thrust it into Sancho's hands, who raising it aloft pointed
to his mouth, gazed at the stars for a quarter of an hour; and when he
had done drinking let his head fall on one side, and giving a deep
sigh, exclaimed, "Ah, whoreson rogue, how catholic it is!" "There, you
see," said he of the Grove, hearing Sancho's exclamation, "how you
have called this wine whoreson by way of praise." "Well," said Sancho,
"I own it, and I grant it is no dishonour to call anyone whoreson when
it is to be understood as praise. But tell me, senor, by what you love
best, is this Ciudad Real wine?" "O rare wine-taster!" said he of the
Grove; "nowhere else indeed does it come from, and it has some years'
age too." "Leave me alone for that," said Sancho; "never fear but I'll
hit upon the place it came from somehow. What would you say, sir
squire, to my having such a great natural instinct in judging wines
that you have only to let me smell one and I can tell positively its
country, its kind, its flavour and soundness, the changes it will
undergo, and everything that appertains to a wine? But it is no
wonder, for I have had in my family, on my father's side, the two best
wine-tasters that have been known in La Mancha for many a long year,
and to prove it I'll tell you now a thing that happened them. They
gave the two of them some wine out of a cask, to try, asking their
opinion as to the condition, quality, goodness or badness of the wine.
One of them tried it with the tip of his tongue, the other did no more
than bring it to his nose. The first said the wine had a flavour of
iron, the second said it had a stronger flavour of cordovan. The owner
said the cask was clean, and that nothing had been added to the wine
from which it could have got a flavour of either iron or leather.
Nevertheless, these two great wine-tasters held to what they had said.
Time went by, the wine was sold, and when they came to clean out the
cask, they found in it a small key hanging to a thong of cordovan; see
now if one who comes of the same stock has not a right to give his
opinion in such like cases." "Therefore, I say," said he of the Grove,
"let us give up going in quest of adventures, and as we have loaves
let us not go looking for cakes, but return to our cribs, for God will
find us there if it be his will." "Until my master reaches Saragossa,"
said Sancho, "I'll remain in his service; after that we'll see." The
end of it was that the two squires talked so much and drank so much
that sleep had to tie their tongues and moderate their thirst, for to
quench it was impossible; and so the pair of them fell asleep clinging
to the now nearly empty bota and with half-chewed morsels in their
mouths; and there we will leave them for the present, to relate what
passed between the Knight of the Grove and him of the Rueful
Countenance. CHAPTER XIV. WHEREIN IS CONTINUED THE ADVENTURE OF THE
KNIGHT OF THE GROVE, TOGETHER WITH THE SENSIBLE, ORIGINAL, AND
TRANQUIL COLLOQUY THAT PASSED BETWEEN THE TWO SQUIRES CHAPTER XIV
WHEREIN IS CONTINUED THE ADVENTURE OF THE KNIGHT OF THE GROVE,
TOGETHER WITH THE SENSIBLE, ORIGINAL, AND TRANQUIL COLLOQUY THAT
PASSED BETWEEN THE TWO SQUIRES CHAPTER XIV WHEREIN IS CONTINUED THE
ADVENTURE OF THE KNIGHT OF THE GROVE, TOGETHER WITH THE SENSIBLE,
ORIGINAL, AND TRANQUIL COLLOQUY THAT PASSED BETWEEN THE TWO SQUIRES
CHAPTER XIV WHEREIN IS CONTINUED THE ADVENTURE OF THE KNIGHT OF THE
GROVE Among the things that passed between Don Quixote and the Knight
of the Wood, the history tells us he of the Grove said to Don Quixote,
"In fine, sir knight, I would have you know that my destiny, or, more
properly speaking, my choice led me to fall in love with the peerless
Casildea de Vandalia. I call her peerless because she has no peer,
whether it be in bodily stature or in the supremacy of rank and
beauty. This same Casildea, then, that I speak of, requited my
honourable passion and gentle aspirations by compelling me, as his
stepmother did Hercules, to engage in many perils of various sorts, at
the end of each promising me that, with the end of the next, the
object of my hopes should be attained; but my labours have gone on
increasing link by link until they are past counting, nor do I know
what will be the last one that is to be the beginning of the
accomplishment of my chaste desires. On one occasion she bade me go
and challenge the famous giantess of Seville, La Giralda by name, who
is as mighty and strong as if made of brass, and though never stirring
from one spot, is the most restless and changeable woman in the world.
I came, I saw, I conquered, and I made her stay quiet and behave
herself, for nothing but north winds blew for more than a week.
Another time I was ordered to lift those ancient stones, the mighty
bulls of Guisando, an enterprise that might more fitly be entrusted to
porters than to knights. Again, she bade me fling myself into the
cavern of Cabra--an unparalleled and awful peril--and bring her a
minute account of all that is concealed in those gloomy depths. I
stopped the motion of the Giralda, I lifted the bulls of Guisando, I
flung myself into the cavern and brought to light the secrets of its
abyss; and my hopes are as dead as dead can be, and her scorn and her
commands as lively as ever. To be brief, last of all she has commanded
me to go through all the provinces of Spain and compel all the
knights-errant wandering therein to confess that she surpasses all
women alive to-day in beauty, and that I am the most valiant and the
most deeply enamoured knight on earth; in support of which claim I
have already travelled over the greater part of Spain, and have there
vanquished several knights who have dared to contradict me; but what I
most plume and pride myself upon is having vanquished in single combat
that so famous knight Don Quixote of La Mancha, and made him confess
that my Casildea is more beautiful than his Dulcinea; and in this one
victory I hold myself to have conquered all the knights in the world;
for this Don Quixote that I speak of has vanquished them all, and I
having vanquished him, his glory, his fame, and his honour have passed
and are transferred to my person; for The more the vanquished hath of
fair renown, The greater glory gilds the victor's crown. Thus the
innumerable achievements of the said Don Quixote are now set down to
my account and have become mine." Don Quixote was amazed when he heard
the Knight of the Grove, and was a thousand times on the point of
telling him he lied, and had the lie direct already on the tip of his
tongue; but he restrained himself as well as he could, in order to
force him to confess the lie with his own lips; so he said to him
quietly, "As to what you say, sir knight, about having vanquished most
of the knights of Spain, or even of the whole world, I say nothing;
but that you have vanquished Don Quixote of La Mancha I consider
doubtful; it may have been some other that resembled him, although
there are few like him." "How! not vanquished?" said he of the Grove;
"by the heaven that is above us I fought Don Quixote and overcame him
and made him yield; and he is a man of tall stature, gaunt features,
long, lank limbs, with hair turning grey, an aquiline nose rather
hooked, and large black drooping moustaches; he does battle under the
name of 'The Countenance,' and he has for squire a peasant called
Sancho Panza; he presses the loins and rules the reins of a famous
steed called Rocinante; and lastly, he has for the mistress of his
will a certain Dulcinea del Toboso, once upon a time called Aldonza
Lorenzo, just as I call mine Casildea de Vandalia because her name is
Casilda and she is of Andalusia. If all these tokens are not enough to
vindicate the truth of what I say, here is Don Quixote himself, who
will maintain it by arms, on foot or on horseback or in any way you
please." And so saying he stood up and laid his hand on his sword,
waiting to see what the Knight of the Grove would do, who in an
equally calm voice said in reply, "Pledges don't distress a good
payer; he who has succeeded in vanquishing you once when transformed,
Sir Don Quixote, may fairly hope to subdue you in your own proper
shape; but as it is not becoming for knights to perform their feats of
arms in the dark, like highwaymen and bullies, let us wait till
daylight, that the sun may behold our deeds; and the conditions of our
combat shall be that the vanquished shall be at the victor's disposal,
to do all that he may enjoin, provided the injunction be such as shall
be becoming a knight." "I am more than satisfied with these conditions
and terms," replied Don Quixote; and so saying, they betook themselves
to where their squires lay, and found them snoring, and in the same
posture they were in when sleep fell upon them. They roused them up,
and bade them get the horses ready, as at sunrise they were to engage
in a bloody and arduous single combat; at which intelligence Sancho
was aghast and thunderstruck, trembling for the safety of his master
because of the mighty deeds he had heard the squire of the Grove
ascribe to his; but without a word the two squires went in quest of
their cattle; for by this time the three horses and the ass had smelt
one another out, and were all together. On the way, he of the Grove
said to Sancho, "A hard life it is we lead and live, senor, we that
are squires to knights-errant; verily, we eat our bread in the sweat
of our faces, which is one of the curses God laid on our first
parents." "It may be said, too," added Sancho, "that we eat it in the
chill of our bodies; for who gets more heat and cold than the
miserable squires of knight-errantry? Even so it would not be so bad
if we had something to eat, for woes are lighter if there's bread; but
sometimes we go a day or two without breaking our fast, except with
the wind that blows." "All that," said he of the Grove, "may be
endured and put up with when we have hopes of reward; for, unless the
knight-errant he serves is excessively unlucky, after a few turns the
squire will at least find himself rewarded with a fine government of
some island or some fair county." "I," said Sancho, "have already told
my master that I shall be content with the government of some island,
and he is so noble and generous that he has promised it to me ever so
many times." "I," said he of the Grove, "shall be satisfied with a
canonry for my services, and my master has already assigned me one."
"Your master," said Sancho, "no doubt is a knight in the Church line,
and can bestow rewards of that sort on his good squire; but mine is
only a layman; though I remember some clever, but, to my mind,
designing people, strove to persuade him to try and become an
archbishop. He, however, would not be anything but an emperor; but I
was trembling all the time lest he should take a fancy to go into the
Church, not finding myself fit to hold office in it; for I may tell
you, though I seem a man, I am no better than a beast for the Church."
"Well, then, you are wrong there," said he of the Grove; "for those
island governments are not all satisfactory; some are awkward, some
are poor, some are dull, and, in short, the highest and choicest
brings with it a heavy burden of cares and troubles which the unhappy
wight to whose lot it has fallen bears upon his shoulders. Far better
would it be for us who have adopted this accursed service to go back
to our own houses, and there employ ourselves in pleasanter
occupations--in hunting or fishing, for instance; for what squire in
the world is there so poor as not to have a hack and a couple of
greyhounds and a fishingrod to amuse himself with in his own village?"
"I am not in want of any of those things," said Sancho; "to be sure I
have no hack, but I have an ass that is worth my master's horse twice
over; God send me a bad Easter, and that the next one I am to see, if
I would swap, even if I got four bushels of barley to boot. You will
laugh at the value I put on my Dapple--for dapple is the colour of my
beast. As to greyhounds, I can't want for them, for there are enough
and to spare in my town; and, moreover, there is more pleasure in
sport when it is at other people's expense." "In truth and earnest,
sir squire," said he of the Grove, "I have made up my mind and
determined to have done with these drunken vagaries of these knights,
and go back to my village, and bring up my children; for I have three,
like three Oriental pearls." "I have two," said Sancho, "that might be
presented before the Pope himself, especially a girl whom I am
breeding up for a countess, please God, though in spite of her
mother." "And how old is this lady that is being bred up for a
countess?" asked he of the Grove. "Fifteen, a couple of years more or
less," answered Sancho; "but she is as tall as a lance, and as fresh
as an April morning, and as strong as a porter." "Those are gifts to
fit her to be not only a countess but a nymph of the greenwood," said
he of the Grove; "whoreson strumpet! what pith the rogue must have!"
To which Sancho made answer, somewhat sulkily, "She's no strumpet, nor
was her mother, nor will either of them be, please God, while I live;
speak more civilly; for one bred up among knights-errant, who are
courtesy itself, your words don't seem to me to be very becoming." "O
how little you know about compliments, sir squire," returned he of the
Grove. "What! don't you know that when a horseman delivers a good
lance thrust at the bull in the plaza, or when anyone does anything
very well, the people are wont to say, 'Ha, whoreson rip! how well he
has done it!' and that what seems to be abuse in the expression is
high praise? Disown sons and daughters, senor, who don't do what
deserves that compliments of this sort should be paid to their
parents." "I do disown them," replied Sancho, "and in this way, and by
the same reasoning, you might call me and my children and my wife all
the strumpets in the world, for all they do and say is of a kind that
in the highest degree deserves the same praise; and to see them again
I pray God to deliver me from mortal sin, or, what comes to the same
thing, to deliver me from this perilous calling of squire into which I
have fallen a second time, decayed and beguiled by a purse with a
hundred ducats that I found one day in the heart of the Sierra Morena;
and the devil is always putting a bag full of doubloons before my
eyes, here, there, everywhere, until I fancy at every stop I am
putting my hand on it, and hugging it, and carrying it home with me,
and making investments, and getting interest, and living like a
prince; and so long as I think of this I make light of all the
hardships I endure with this simpleton of a master of mine, who, I
well know, is more of a madman than a knight." "There's why they say
that 'covetousness bursts the bag,'" said he of the Grove; "but if you
come to talk of that sort, there is not a greater one in the world
than my master, for he is one of those of whom they say, 'the cares of
others kill the ass;' for, in order that another knight may recover
the senses he has lost, he makes a madman of himself and goes looking
for what, when found, may, for all I know, fly in his own face." "And
is he in love perchance?" asked Sancho. "He is," said of the Grove,
"with one Casildea de Vandalia, the rawest and best roasted lady the
whole world could produce; but that rawness is not the only foot he
limps on, for he has greater schemes rumbling in his bowels, as will
be seen before many hours are over." "There's no road so smooth but it
has some hole or hindrance in it," said Sancho; "in other houses they
cook beans, but in mine it's by the potful; madness will have more
followers and hangers-on than sound sense; but if there be any truth
in the common saying, that to have companions in trouble gives some
relief, I may take consolation from you, inasmuch as you serve a
master as crazy as my own." "Crazy but valiant," replied he of the
Grove, "and more roguish than crazy or valiant." "Mine is not that,"
said Sancho; "I mean he has nothing of the rogue in him; on the
contrary, he has the soul of a pitcher; he has no thought of doing
harm to anyone, only good to all, nor has he any malice whatever in
him; a child might persuade him that it is night at noonday; and for
this simplicity I love him as the core of my heart, and I can't bring
myself to leave him, let him do ever such foolish things." "For all
that, brother and senor," said he of the Grove, "if the blind lead the
blind, both are in danger of falling into the pit. It is better for us
to beat a quiet retreat and get back to our own quarters; for those
who seek adventures don't always find good ones." Sancho kept spitting
from time to time, and his spittle seemed somewhat ropy and dry,
observing which the compassionate squire of the Grove said, "It seems
to me that with all this talk of ours our tongues are sticking to the
roofs of our mouths; but I have a pretty good loosener hanging from
the saddle-bow of my horse," and getting up he came back the next
minute with a large bota of wine and a pasty half a yard across; and
this is no exaggeration, for it was made of a house rabbit so big that
Sancho, as he handled it, took it to be made of a goat, not to say a
kid, and looking at it he said, "And do you carry this with you,
senor?" "Why, what are you thinking about?" said the other; "do you
take me for some paltry squire? I carry a better larder on my horse's
croup than a general takes with him when he goes on a march." Sancho
ate without requiring to be pressed, and in the dark bolted mouthfuls
like the knots on a tether, and said he, "You are a proper trusty
squire, one of the right sort, sumptuous and grand, as this banquet
shows, which, if it has not come here by magic art, at any rate has
the look of it; not like me, unlucky beggar, that have nothing more in
my alforjas than a scrap of cheese, so hard that one might brain a
giant with it, and, to keep it company, a few dozen carobs and as many
more filberts and walnuts; thanks to the austerity of my master, and
the idea he has and the rule he follows, that knights-errant must not
live or sustain themselves on anything except dried fruits and the
herbs of the field." "By my faith, brother," said he of the Grove, "my
stomach is not made for thistles, or wild pears, or roots of the
woods; let our masters do as they like, with their chivalry notions
and laws, and eat what those enjoin; I carry my prog-basket and this
bota hanging to the saddle-bow, whatever they may say; and it is such
an object of worship with me, and I love it so, that there is hardly a
moment but I am kissing and embracing it over and over again;" and so
saying he thrust it into Sancho's hands, who raising it aloft pointed
to his mouth, gazed at the stars for a quarter of an hour; and when he
had done drinking let his head fall on one side, and giving a deep
sigh, exclaimed, "Ah, whoreson rogue, how catholic it is!" "There, you
see," said he of the Grove, hearing Sancho's exclamation, "how you
have called this wine whoreson by way of praise." "Well," said Sancho,
"I own it, and I grant it is no dishonour to call anyone whoreson when
it is to be understood as praise. But tell me, senor, by what you love
best, is this Ciudad Real wine?" "O rare wine-taster!" said he of the
Grove; "nowhere else indeed does it come from, and it has some years'
age too." "Leave me alone for that," said Sancho; "never fear but I'll
hit upon the place it came from somehow. What would you say, sir
squire, to my having such a great natural instinct in judging wines
that you have only to let me smell one and I can tell positively its
country, its kind, its flavour and soundness, the changes it will
undergo, and everything that appertains to a wine? But it is no
wonder, for I have had in my family, on my father's side, the two best
wine-tasters that have been known in La Mancha for many a long year,
and to prove it I'll tell you now a thing that happened them. They
gave the two of them some wine out of a cask, to try, asking their
opinion as to the condition, quality, goodness or badness of the wine.
One of them tried it with the tip of his tongue, the other did no more
than bring it to his nose. The first said the wine had a flavour of
iron, the second said it had a stronger flavour of cordovan. The owner
said the cask was clean, and that nothing had been added to the wine
from which it could have got a flavour of either iron or leather.
Nevertheless, these two great wine-tasters held to what they had said.
Time went by, the wine was sold, and when they came to clean out the
cask, they found in it a small key hanging to a thong of cordovan; see
now if one who comes of the same stock has not a right to give his
opinion in such like cases." "Therefore, I say," said he of the Grove,
"let us give up going in quest of adventures, and as we have loaves
let us not go looking for cakes, but return to our cribs, for God will
find us there if it be his will." "Until my master reaches Saragossa,"
said Sancho, "I'll remain in his service; after that we'll see." The
end of it was that the licentiate reckoned up for him by thrusts every
one of the buttons of the short cassock he wore, tore the skirts into
strips, like the tails of a cuttlefish, knocked off his hat twice, and
so completely tired him out, that in vexation, anger, and rage, he
took the sword by the hilt and flung it away with such force, that one
of the peasants that were there, who was a notary, and who went for
it, made an affidavit afterwards that he sent it nearly three-quarters
of a league, which testimony will serve, and has served, to show and
establish with all certainty that strength is overcome by skill.
Corchuelo sat down wearied, and Sancho approaching him said, "By my
faith, senor bachelor, if your worship takes my advice, you will never
challenge anyone to fence again, only to wrestle and throw the bar,
for you have the youth and strength for that; but as for these fencers
as they call them, I have heard say they can put the point of a sword
through the eye of a needle." "I am satisfied with having tumbled off
my donkey," said Corchuelo, "and with having had the truth I was so
ignorant of proved to me by experience;" and getting up he embraced
the licentiate, and they were better friends than ever; and not caring
to wait for the notary who had gone for the sword, as they saw he
would be a long time about it, they resolved to push on so as to reach
the village of Quiteria, to which they all belonged, in good time.
During the remainder of the journey the licentiate held forth to them
on the excellences of the sword, with such conclusive arguments, and
such figures and mathematical proofs, that all were convinced of the
value of the science, and Corchuelo cured of his dogmatism. It grew
dark; but before they reached the town it seemed to them all as if
there was a heaven full of countless glittering stars in front of it.
They heard, too, the pleasant mingled notes of a variety of
instruments, flutes, drums, psalteries, pipes, tabors, and timbrels,
and as they drew near they perceived that the trees of a leafy arcade
that had been constructed at the entrance of the town were filled with
lights unaffected by the wind, for the breeze at the time was so
gentle that it had not power to stir the leaves on the trees. The
musicians were the life of the wedding, wandering through the pleasant
grounds in separate bands, some dancing, others singing, others
playing the various instruments already mentioned. In short, it seemed
as though mirth and gaiety were frisking and gambolling all over the
meadow. Several other persons were engaged in erecting raised benches
from which people might conveniently see the plays and dances that
were to be performed the next day on the spot dedicated to the
celebration of the marriage of Camacho the rich and the obsequies of
Basilio. Don Quixote would not enter the village, although the peasant
as well as the bachelor pressed him; he excused himself, however, on
the grounds, amply sufficient in his opinion, that it was the custom
of knights-errant to sleep in the fields and woods in preference to
towns, even were it under gilded ceilings; and so turned aside a
little out of the road, very much against Sancho's will, as the good
quarters he had enjoyed in the castle or house of Don Diego came back
to his mind. CHAPTER XX. WHEREIN AN ACCOUNT IS GIVEN OF THE WEDDING OF
CAMACHO THE RICH, TOGETHER WITH THE INCIDENT OF BASILIO THE POOR
CHAPTER XXI IN WHICH CAMACHO'S WEDDING IS CONTINUED, WITH OTHER
DELIGHTFUL INCIDENTS While Don Quixote and Sancho were engaged in the
discussion set forth the last chapter, they heard loud shouts and a
great noise, which were uttered and made by the men on the mares as
they went at full gallop, shouting, to receive the bride and
bridegroom, who were approaching with musical instruments and
pageantry of all sorts around them, and accompanied by the priest and
the relatives of both, and all the most distinguished people of the
surrounding villages. When Sancho saw the bride, he exclaimed, "By my
faith, she is not dressed like a country girl, but like some fine
court lady; egad, as well as I can make out, the patena she wears rich
coral, and her green Cuenca stuff is thirty-pile velvet; and then the
white linen trimming--by my oath, but it's satin! Look at her
hands--jet rings on them! May I never have luck if they're not gold
rings, and real gold, and set with pearls as white as a curdled milk,
and every one of them worth an eye of one's head! Whoreson baggage,
what hair she has! if it's not a wig, I never saw longer or fairer all
the days of my life. See how bravely she bears herself--and her shape!
Wouldn't you say she was like a walking palm tree loaded with clusters
of dates? for the trinkets she has hanging from her hair and neck look
just like them. I swear in my heart she is a brave lass, and fit 'to
pass over the banks of Flanders.'" Don Quixote laughed at Sancho's
boorish eulogies and thought that, saving his lady Dulcinea del
Toboso, he had never seen a more beautiful woman. The fair Quiteria
appeared somewhat pale, which was, no doubt, because of the bad night
brides always pass dressing themselves out for their wedding on the
morrow. They advanced towards a theatre that stood on one side of the
meadow decked with carpets and boughs, where they were to plight their
troth, and from which they were to behold the dances and plays; but at
the moment of their arrival at the spot they heard a loud outcry
behind them, and a voice exclaiming, "Wait a little, ye, as
inconsiderate as ye are hasty!" At these words all turned round, and
perceived that the speaker was a man clad in what seemed to be a loose
black coat garnished with crimson patches like flames. He was crowned
(as was presently seen) with a crown of gloomy cypress, and in his
hand he held a long staff. As he approached he was recognised by
everyone as the gay Basilio, and all waited anxiously to see what
would come of his words, in dread of some catastrophe in consequence
of his appearance at such a moment. He came up at last weary and
breathless, and planting himself in front of the bridal pair, drove
his staff, which had a steel spike at the end, into the ground, and,
with a pale face and eyes fixed on Quiteria, he thus addressed her in
a hoarse, trembling voice: "Well dost thou know, ungrateful Quiteria,
that according to the holy law we acknowledge, so long as live thou
canst take no husband; nor art thou ignorant either that, in my hopes
that time and my own exertions would improve my fortunes, I have never
failed to observe the respect due to thy honour; but thou, casting
behind thee all thou owest to my true love, wouldst surrender what is
mine to another whose wealth serves to bring him not only good fortune
but supreme happiness; and now to complete it (not that I think he
deserves it, but inasmuch as heaven is pleased to bestow it upon him),
I will, with my own hands, do away with the obstacle that may
interfere with it, and remove myself from between you. Long live the
rich Camacho! many a happy year may he live with the ungrateful
Quiteria! and let the poor Basilio die, Basilio whose poverty clipped
the wings of his happiness, and brought him to the grave!" And so
saying, he seized the staff he had driven into the ground, and leaving
one half of it fixed there, showed it to be a sheath that concealed a
tolerably long rapier; and, what may be called its hilt being planted
in the ground, he swiftly, coolly, and deliberately threw himself upon
it, and in an instant the bloody point and half the steel blade
appeared at his back, the unhappy man falling to the earth bathed in
his blood, and transfixed by his own weapon. His friends at once ran
to his aid, filled with grief at his misery and sad fate, and Don
Quixote, dismounting from Rocinante, hastened to support him, and took
him in his arms, and found he had not yet ceased to breathe. They were
about to draw out the rapier, but the priest who was standing by
objected to its being withdrawn before he had confessed him, as the
instant of its withdrawal would be that of this death. Basilio,
however, reviving slightly, said in a weak voice, as though in pain,
"If thou wouldst consent, cruel Quiteria, to give me thy hand as my
bride in this last fatal moment, I might still hope that my rashness
would find pardon, as by its means I attained the bliss of being
thine." Hearing this the priest bade him think of the welfare of his
soul rather than of the cravings of the body, and in all earnestness
implore God's pardon for his sins and for his rash resolve; to which
Basilio replied that he was determined not to confess unless Quiteria
first gave him her hand in marriage, for that happiness would compose
his mind and give him courage to make his confession. Don Quixote
hearing the wounded man's entreaty, exclaimed aloud that what Basilio
asked was just and reasonable, and moreover a request that might be
easily complied with; and that it would be as much to Senor Camacho's
honour to receive the lady Quiteria as the widow of the brave Basilio
as if he received her direct from her father. "In this case," said he,
"it will be only to say 'yes,' and no consequences can follow the
utterance of the word, for the nuptial couch of this marriage must be
the grave." Camacho was listening to all this, perplexed and
bewildered and not knowing what to say or do; but so urgent were the
entreaties of Basilio's friends, imploring him to allow Quiteria to
give him her hand, so that his soul, quitting this life in despair,
should not be lost, that they moved, nay, forced him, to say that if
Quiteria were willing to give it he was satisfied, as it was only
putting off the fulfillment of his wishes for a moment. At once all
assailed Quiteria and pressed her, some with prayers, and others with
tears, and others with persuasive arguments, to give her hand to poor
Basilio; but she, harder than marble and more unmoved than any statue,
seemed unable or unwilling to utter a word, nor would she have given
any reply had not the priest bade her decide quickly what she meant to
do, as Basilio now had his soul at his teeth, and there was no time
for hesitation. On this the fair Quiteria, to all appearance
distressed, grieved, and repentant, advanced without a word to where
Basilio lay, his eyes already turned in his head, his breathing short
and painful, murmuring the name of Quiteria between his teeth, and
apparently about to die like a heathen and not like a Christian.
Quiteria approached him, and kneeling, demanded his hand by signs
without speaking. Basilio opened his eyes and gazing fixedly at her,
said, "O Quiteria, why hast thou turned compassionate at a moment when
thy compassion will serve as a dagger to rob me of life, for I have
not now the strength left either to bear the happiness thou givest me
in accepting me as thine, or to suppress the pain that is rapidly
drawing the dread shadow of death over my eyes? What I entreat of
thee, O thou fatal star to me, is that the hand thou demandest of me
and wouldst give me, be not given out of complaisance or to deceive me
afresh, but that thou confess and declare that without any constraint
upon thy will thou givest it to me as to thy lawful husband; for it is
not meet that thou shouldst trifle with me at such a moment as this,
or have recourse to falsehoods with one who has dealt so truly by
thee." While uttering these words he showed such weakness that the
bystanders expected each return of faintness would take his life with
it. Then Quiteria, overcome with modesty and shame, holding in her
right hand the hand of Basilio, said, "No force would bend my will; as
freely, therefore, as it is possible for me to do so, I give thee the
hand of a lawful wife, and take thine if thou givest it to me of thine
own free will, untroubled and unaffected by the calamity thy hasty act
has brought upon thee." "Yes, I give it," said Basilio, "not agitated
or distracted, but with unclouded reason that heaven is pleased to
grant me, thus do I give myself to be thy husband." "And I give myself
to be thy wife," said Quiteria, "whether thou livest many years, or
they carry thee from my arms to the grave." "For one so badly
wounded," observed Sancho at this point, "this young man has a great
deal to say; they should make him leave off billing and cooing, and
attend to his soul; for to my thinking he has it more on his tongue
than at his teeth." Basilio and Quiteria having thus joined hands, the
priest, deeply moved and with tears in his eyes, pronounced the
blessing upon them, and implored heaven to grant an easy passage to
the soul of the newly wedded man, who, the instant he received the
blessing, started nimbly to his feet and with unparalleled effrontery
pulled out the rapier that had been sheathed in his body. All the
bystanders were astounded, and some, more simple than inquiring, began
shouting, "A miracle, a miracle!" But Basilio replied, "No miracle, no
miracle; only a trick, a trick!" The priest, perplexed and amazed,
made haste to examine the wound with both hands, and found that the
blade had passed, not through Basilio's flesh and ribs, but through a
hollow iron tube full of blood, which he had adroitly fixed at the
place, the blood, as was afterwards ascertained, having been so
prepared as not to congeal. In short, the priest and Camacho and most
of those present saw they were tricked and made fools of. The bride
showed no signs of displeasure at the deception; on the contrary,
hearing them say that the marriage, being fraudulent, would not be
valid, she said that she confirmed it afresh, whence they all
concluded that the affair had been planned by agreement and
understanding between the pair, whereat Camacho and his supporters
were so mortified that they proceeded to revenge themselves by
violence, and a great number of them drawing their swords attacked
Basilio, in whose protection as many more swords were in an instant
unsheathed, while Don Quixote taking the lead on horseback, with his
lance over his arm and well covered with his shield, made all give way
before him. Sancho, who never found any pleasure or enjoyment in such
doings, retreated to the wine-jars from which he had taken his
delectable skimmings, considering that, as a holy place, that spot
would be respected. "Hold, sirs, hold!" cried Don Quixote in a loud
voice; "we have no right to take vengeance for wrongs that love may do
to us: remember love and war are the same thing, and as in war it is
allowable and common to make use of wiles and stratagems to overcome
the enemy, so in the contests and rivalries of love the tricks and
devices employed to attain the desired end are justifiable, provided
they be not to the discredit or dishonour of the loved object.
Quiteria belonged to Basilio and Basilio to Quiteria by the just and
beneficent disposal of heaven. Camacho is rich, and can purchase his
pleasure when, where, and as it pleases him. Basilio has but this
ewe-lamb, and no one, however powerful he may be, shall take her from
him; these two whom God hath joined man cannot separate; and he who
attempts it must first pass the point of this lance;" and so saying he
brandished it so stoutly and dexterously that he overawed all who did
not know him. But so deep an impression had the rejection of Quiteria
made on Camacho's mind that it banished her at once from his thoughts;
and so the counsels of the priest, who was a wise and kindly disposed
man, prevailed with him, and by their means he and his partisans were
pacified and tranquillised, and to prove it put up their swords again,
inveighing against the pliancy of Quiteria rather than the craftiness
of Basilio; Camacho maintaining that, if Quiteria as a maiden had such
a love for Basilio, she would have loved him too as a married woman,
and that he ought to thank heaven more for having taken her than for
having given her. Camacho and those of his following, therefore, being
consoled and pacified, those on Basilio's side were appeased; and the
rich Camacho, to show that he felt no resentment for the trick, and
did not care about it, desired the festival to go on just as if he
were married in reality. Neither Basilio, however, nor his bride, nor
their followers would take any part in it, and they withdrew to
Basilio's village; for the poor, if they are persons of virtue and
good sense, have those who follow, honour, and uphold them, just as
the rich have those who flatter and dance attendance on them. With
them they carried Don Quixote, regarding him as a man of worth and a
stout one. Sancho alone had a cloud on his soul, for he found himself
debarred from waiting for Camacho's splendid feast and festival, which
lasted until night; and thus dragged away, he moodily followed his
master, who accompanied Basilio's party, and left behind him the
flesh-pots of Egypt; though in his heart he took them with him, and
their now nearly finished skimmings that he carried in the bucket
conjured up visions before his eyes of the glory and abundance of the
good cheer he was losing. And so, vexed and dejected though not
hungry, without dismounting from Dapple he followed in the footsteps
of Rocinante. CHAPTER XXII. WHERIN IS RELATED THE GRAND ADVENTURE OF
THE CAVE OF MONTESINOS IN THE HEART OF LA MANCHA, WHICH THE VALIANT
DON QUIXOTE BROUGHT TO A HAPPY TERMINATION Many and great were the
attentions shown to Don Quixote by the newly married couple, who felt
themselves under an obligation to him for coming forward in defence of
their cause; and they exalted his wisdom to the same level with his
courage, rating him as a Cid in arms, and a Cicero in eloquence.
Worthy Sancho enjoyed himself for three days at the expense of the
pair, from whom they learned that the sham wound was not a scheme
arranged with the fair Quiteria, but a device of Basilio's, who
counted on exactly the result they had seen; he confessed, it is true,
that he had confided his idea to some of his friends, so that at the
proper time they might aid him in his purpose and insure the success
of the deception. "That," said Don Quixote, "is not and ought not to
be called deception which aims at virtuous ends;" and the marriage of
lovers he maintained to be a most excellent end, reminding them,
however, that love has no greater enemy than hunger and constant want;
for love is all gaiety, enjoyment, and happiness, especially when the
lover is in the possession of the object of his love, and poverty and
want are the declared enemies of all these; which he said to urge
Senor Basilio to abandon the practice of those accomplishments he was
skilled in, for though they brought him fame, they brought him no
money, and apply himself to the acquisition of wealth by legitimate
industry, which will never fail those who are prudent and persevering.
The poor man who is a man of honour (if indeed a poor man can be a man
of honour) has a jewel when he has a fair wife, and if she is taken
from him, his honour is taken from him and slain. The fair woman who
is a woman of honour, and whose husband is poor, deserves to be
crowned with the laurels and crowns of victory and triumph. Beauty by
itself attracts the desires of all who behold it, and the royal eagles
and birds of towering flight stoop on it as on a dainty lure; but if
beauty be accompanied by want and penury, then the ravens and the
kites and other birds of prey assail it, and she who stands firm
against such attacks well deserves to be called the crown of her
husband. "Remember, O prudent Basilio," added Don Quixote, "it was the
opinion of a certain sage, I know not whom, that there was not more
than one good woman in the whole world; and his advice was that each
one should think and believe that this one good woman was his own
wife, and in this way he would live happy. I myself am not married,
nor, so far, has it ever entered my thoughts to be so; nevertheless I
would venture to give advice to anyone who might ask it, as to the
mode in which he should seek a wife such as he would be content to
marry. The first thing I would recommend him, would be to look to good
name rather than to wealth, for a good woman does not win a good name
merely by being good, but by letting it be seen that she is so, and
open looseness and freedom do much more damage to a woman's honour
than secret depravity. If you take a good woman into your house it
will be an easy matter to keep her good, and even to make her still
better; but if you take a bad one you will find it hard work to mend
her, for it is no very easy matter to pass from one extreme to
another. I do not say it is impossible, but I look upon it as
difficult." Sancho, listening to all this, said to himself, "This
master of mine, when I say anything that has weight and substance,
says I might take a pulpit in hand, and go about the world preaching
fine sermons." "He preaches well who lives well," said Sancho, "and I
know no more theology than that." "Nor needst thou," said Don Quixote,
"but I cannot conceive or make out how it is that, the fear of God
being the beginning of wisdom, thou, who art more afraid of a lizard
than of him, knowest so much." "Pass judgment on your chivalries,
senor," returned Sancho, "and don't set yourself up to judge of other
men's fears or braveries, for I am as good a fearer of God as my
neighbours; but leave me to despatch these skimmings, for all the rest
is only idle talk that we shall be called to account for in the other
world;" and so saying, he began a fresh attack on the bucket, with
such a hearty appetite that he aroused Don Quixote's, who no doubt
would have helped him had he not been prevented by what must be told
farther on. CHAPTER XXI. IN WHICH CAMACHO'S WEDDING IS CONTINUED, WITH
OTHER DELIGHTFUL INCIDENTS While Don Quixote and Sancho were engaged
in the discussion set forth the last chapter, they heard loud shouts
and a great noise, which were uttered and made by the men on the mares
as they went at full gallop, shouting, to receive the bride and
bridegroom, who were approaching with musical instruments and
pageantry of all sorts around them, and accompanied by the priest and
the relatives of both, and all the most distinguished people of the
surrounding villages. When Sancho saw the bride, he exclaimed, "By my
faith, she is not dressed like a country girl, but like some fine
court lady; egad, as well as I can make out, the patena she wears rich
coral, and her green Cuenca stuff is thirty-pile velvet; and then the
white linen trimming--by my oath, but it's satin! Look at her
hands--jet rings on them! May I never have luck if they're not gold
rings, and real gold, and set with pearls as white as a curdled milk,
and every one of them worth an eye of one's head! Whoreson baggage,
what hair she has! if it's not a wig, I never saw longer or fairer all
the days of my life. See how bravely she bears herself--and her shape!
Wouldn't you say she was like a walking palm tree loaded with clusters
of dates? for the trinkets she has hanging from her hair and neck look
just like them. I swear in my heart she is a brave lass, and fit 'to
pass over the banks of Flanders.'" Don Quixote laughed at Sancho's
boorish eulogies and thought that, saving his lady Dulcinea del
Toboso, he had never seen a more beautiful woman. The fair Quiteria
appeared somewhat pale, which was, no doubt, because of the bad night
brides always pass dressing themselves out for their wedding on the
morrow. They advanced towards a theatre that stood on one side of the
meadow decked with carpets and boughs, where they were to plight their
troth, and from which they were to behold the dances and plays; but at
the moment of their arrival at the spot they heard a loud outcry
behind them, and a voice exclaiming, "Wait a little, ye, as
inconsiderate as ye are hasty!" At these words all turned round, and
perceived that the speaker was a man clad in what seemed to be a loose
black coat garnished with crimson patches like flames. He was crowned
(as was presently seen) with a crown of gloomy cypress, and in his
hand he held a long staff. As he approached he was recognised by
everyone as the gay Basilio, and all waited anxiously to see what
would come of this talk which he could not understand; but when he
perceived the wench struggling to get free and Don Quixote striving to
hold her, not relishing the joke he raised his arm and delivered such
a terrible cuff on the lank jaws of the amorous knight that he bathed
all his mouth in blood, and not content with this he mounted on his
ribs and with his feet tramped all over them at a pace rather smarter
than a trot. The bed which was somewhat crazy and not very firm on its
feet, unable to support the additional weight of the carrier, came to
the ground, and at the mighty crash of this the innkeeper awoke and at
once concluded that it must be some brawl of Maritornes', because
after calling loudly to her he got no answer. With this suspicion he
got up, and lighting a lamp hastened to the quarter where he had heard
the disturbance. The wench, seeing that her master was coming and
knowing that his temper was terrible, frightened and panic-stricken
made for the bed of Sancho Panza, who still slept, and crouching upon
it made a ball of herself. The innkeeper came in exclaiming, "Where
art thou, strumpet? Of course this is some of thy work." At this
Sancho awoke, and feeling this mass almost on top of him fancied he
had the nightmare and began to distribute fisticuffs all round, of
which a certain share fell upon Maritornes, who, irritated by the pain
and flinging modesty aside, paid back so many in return to Sancho that
she woke him up in spite of himself. He then, finding himself so
handled, by whom he knew not, raising himself up as well as he could,
grappled with Maritornes, and he and she between them began the
bitterest and drollest scrimmage in the world. The carrier, however,
perceiving by the light of the innkeeper candle how it fared with his
ladylove, quitting Don Quixote, ran to bring her the help she needed;
and the innkeeper did the same but with a different intention, for his
was to chastise the lass, as he believed that beyond a doubt she alone
was the cause of all the harmony. And so, as the saying is, cat to
rat, rat to rope, rope to stick, the carrier pounded Sancho, Sancho
the lass, she him, and the innkeeper her, and all worked away so
briskly that they did not give themselves a moment's rest; and the
best of it was that the innkeeper's lamp went out, and as they were
left in the dark they all laid on one upon the other in a mass so
unmercifully that there was not a sound spot left where a hand could
light. It so happened that there was lodging that night in the inn a
caudrillero of what they call the Old Holy Brotherhood of Toledo, who,
also hearing the extraordinary noise of the conflict, seized his staff
and the tin case with his warrants, and made his way in the dark into
the room crying: "Hold! in the name of the Jurisdiction! Hold! in the
name of the Holy Brotherhood!" The first that he came upon was the
pummelled Don Quixote, who lay stretched senseless on his back upon
his broken-down bed, and, his hand falling on the beard as he felt
about, he continued to cry, "Help for the Jurisdiction!" but
perceiving that he whom he had laid hold of did not move or stir, he
concluded that he was dead and that those in the room were his
murderers, and with this suspicion he raised his voice still higher,
calling out, "Shut the inn gate; see that no one goes out; they have
killed a man here!" This cry startled them all, and each dropped the
contest at the point at which the voice reached him. The innkeeper
retreated to his room, the carrier to his pack-saddles, the lass to
her crib; the unlucky Don Quixote and Sancho alone were unable to move
from where they were. The cuadrillero on this let go Don Quixote's
beard, and went out to look for a light to search for and apprehend
the culprits; but not finding one, as the innkeeper had purposely
extinguished the lantern on retreating to his room, he was compelled
to have recourse to the hearth, where after much time and trouble he
lit another lamp. CHAPTER XVII. IN WHICH ARE CONTAINED THE INNUMERABLE
TROUBLES WHICH THE BRAVE DON QUIXOTE AND HIS GOOD SQUIRE SANCHO PANZA
ENDURED IN THE INN, WHICH TO HIS MISFORTUNE HE TOOK TO BE A CASTLE By
this time Don Quixote had recovered from his swoon; and in the same
tone of voice in which he had called to his squire the day before when
he lay stretched "in the vale of the stakes," he began calling to him
now, "Sancho, my friend, art thou asleep? sleepest thou, friend
Sancho?" "How can I sleep, curses on it!" returned Sancho
discontentedly and bitterly, "when it is plain that all the devils
have been at me this night?" "Thou mayest well believe that," answered
Don Quixote, "because, either I know little, or this castle is
enchanted, for thou must know-but this that I am now about to tell
thee thou must swear to keep secret until after my death." "I swear
it," answered Sancho. "I say so," continued Don Quixote, "because I
hate taking away anyone's good name." "I say," replied Sancho, "that I
swear to hold my tongue about it till the end of your worship's days,
and God grant I may be able to let it out tomorrow." "Do I do thee
such injuries, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "that thou wouldst mount a
scaffold in order to see the bulls without danger." "To tell the
truth," returned Sancho, "the monstrous nose of that squire has filled
me with fear and terror, and I dare not stay near him." "It is," said
Don Quixote, "such a one that were I not what I am it would terrify me
too; so, come, I will help thee up where thou wilt." While Don Quixote
waited for Sancho to mount into the cork tree he of the Mirrors took
as much ground as he considered requisite, and, supposing Don Quixote
to have done the same, without waiting for any sound of trumpet or
other signal to direct them, he wheeled his horse, which was not more
agile or better-looking than Rocinante, and at his top speed, which
was an easy trot, he proceeded to charge his enemy; seeing him,
however, engaged in putting Sancho up, he drew rein, and halted in mid
career, for which his horse was very grateful, as he was already
unable to go. Don Quixote, fancying that his foe was coming down upon
him flying, drove his spurs vigorously into Rocinante's lean flanks
and made him scud along in such style that the history tells us that
on this occasion only was he known to make something like running, for
on all others it was a simple trot with him; and with this
unparalleled fury he bore down where he of the Mirrors stood digging
his spurs into his horse up to buttons, without being able to make him
stir a finger's length from the spot where he had come to a standstill
in his course. At this lucky moment and crisis, Don Quixote came upon
his adversary, in trouble with his horse, and embarrassed with his
lance, which he either could not manage, or had no time to lay in
rest. Don Quixote, however, paid no attention to these difficulties,
and in perfect safety to himself and without any risk encountered him
of the Mirrors with such force that he brought him to the ground in
spite of himself over the haunches of his horse, and with so heavy a
fall that he lay to all appearance dead, not stirring hand or foot.
The instant Sancho saw him fall he slid down from the cork tree, and
made all haste to where his master was, who, dismounting from
Rocinante, went and stood over him of the Mirrors, and unlacing his
helmet to see if he was dead, and to give him air if he should happen
to be alive, he saw--who can say what he saw, without filling all who
hear it with astonishment, wonder, and awe? He saw, the history says,
the very countenance, the very face, the very look, the very
physiognomy, the very effigy, the very image of the bachelor Samson
Carrasco! As soon as he saw it he called out in a loud voice, "Make
haste here, Sancho, and behold what thou art to see but not to
believe; quick, my son, and learn what magic can do, and wizards and
enchanters are capable of." Sancho came up, and when he saw the
countenance of the bachelor Carrasco, he fell to crossing himself a
thousand times, and blessing himself as many more. All this time the
prostrate knight showed no signs of life, and Sancho said to Don
Quixote, "It is my opinion, senor, that in any case your worship
should take and thrust your sword into the mouth of this one here that
looks like the bachelor Samson Carrasco; perhaps in him you will kill
one of your enemies, the enchanters." "Thy advice is not bad," said
Don Quixote, "for of enemies the fewer the better;" and he was drawing
his sword to carry into effect Sancho's counsel and suggestion, when
the squire of the Mirrors came up, now without the nose which had made
him so hideous, and cried out in a loud voice, "Mind what you are
about, Senor Don Quixote; that is your friend, the bachelor Samson
Carrasco, you have at your feet, and I am his squire." "And the nose?"
said Sancho, seeing him without the hideous feature he had before; to
which he replied, "I have it here in my pocket," and putting his hand
into his right pocket, he pulled out a masquerade nose of varnished
pasteboard of the make already described; and Sancho, examining him
more and more closely, exclaimed aloud in a voice of amazement, "Holy
Mary be good to me! Isn't it Tom Cecial, my neighbour and gossip?"
"Why, to be sure I am!" returned the now unnosed squire; "Tom Cecial I
am, gossip and friend Sancho Panza; and I'll tell you presently the
means and tricks and falsehoods by which I have been brought here; but
in the meantime, beg and entreat of your master not to touch,
maltreat, wound, or slay the Knight of the Mirrors whom he has at his
feet; because, beyond all dispute, it is the rash and ill-advised
bachelor Samson Carrasco, our fellow townsman." At this moment he of
the Mirrors came to himself, and Don Quixote perceiving it, held the
naked point of his sword over his face, and said to him, "You are a
dead man, knight, unless you confess that the peerless Dulcinea del
Toboso excels your Casildea de Vandalia in beauty; and in addition to
this you must promise, if you should survive this encounter and fall,
to go to the city of El Toboso and present yourself before her on my
behalf, that she deal with you according to her good pleasure; and if
she leaves you free to do yours, you are in like manner to return and
seek me out (for the trail of my mighty deeds will serve you as a
guide to lead you to where I may be), and tell me what may have passed
between you and her-conditions which, in accordance with what we
stipulated before our combat, do not transgress the just limits of
knight-errantry." "I confess," said the fallen knight, "that the dirty
tattered shoe of the lady Dulcinea del Toboso is better than the
ill-combed though clean beard of Casildea; and I promise to go and to
return from her presence to yours, and to give you a full and
particular account of all you demand of me." "You must also confess
and believe," added Don Quixote, "that the knight you vanquished was
not and could not be Don Quixote of La Mancha, but some one else in
his likeness, just as I confess and believe that you, though you seem
to be the bachelor Samson Carrasco, are not so, but some other
resembling him, whom my enemies have here put before me in his shape,
in order that I may restrain and moderate the vehemence of my wrath,
and make a gentle use of the glory of my victory." "I confess, hold,
and think everything to be as you believe, hold, and think it," the
crippled knight; "let me rise, I entreat you; if, indeed, the shock of
my fall will allow me, for it has left me in a sorry plight enough."
Don Quixote helped him to rise, with the assistance of his squire Tom
Cecial; from whom Sancho never took his eyes, and to whom he put
questions, the replies to which furnished clear proof that he was
really and truly the Tom Cecial he said; but the impression made on
Sancho's mind by what his master said about the enchanters having
changed the face of the Knight of the Mirrors into that of the
bachelor Samson Carrasco, would not permit him to believe what he saw
with his eyes. In fine, both master and man remained under the
delusion; and, down in the mouth, and out of luck, he of the Mirrors
and his squire parted from Don Quixote and Sancho, he meaning to go
look for some village where he could plaster and strap his ribs. Don
Quixote and Sancho resumed their journey to Saragossa, and on it the
history leaves them in order that it may tell who the Knight of the
Mirrors and his long-nosed squire were. CHAPTER XV. WHEREIN IT IS TOLD
AND KNOWN WHO THE KNIGHT OF THE MIRRORS AND HIS SQUIRE WERE Don
Quixote went off satisfied, elated, and vain-glorious in the highest
degree at having won a victory over such a valiant knight as he
fancied him of the Mirrors to be, and one from whose knightly word he
expected to learn whether the enchantment of his lady still continued;
inasmuch as the said vanquished knight was bound, under the penalty of
ceasing to be one, to return and render him an account of what took
place between him and her. But Don Quixote was of one mind, he of the
Mirrors of another, for he just then had no thought of anything but
finding some village where he could plaster himself, as has been said
already. The history goes on to say, then, that when the bachelor
Samson Carrasco recommended Don Quixote to resume his knight-errantry
which he had laid aside, it was in consequence of having been
previously in conclave with the curate and the barber on the means to
be adopted to induce Don Quixote to stay at home in peace and quiet
without worrying himself with his ill-starred adventures; at which
consultation it was decided by the unanimous vote of all, and on the
special advice of Carrasco, that Don Quixote should be allowed to go,
as it seemed impossible to restrain him, and that Samson should sally
forth to meet him as a knight-errant, and do battle with him, for
there would be no difficulty about a cause, and vanquish him, that
being looked upon as an easy matter; and that it should be agreed and
settled that the vanquished was to be at the mercy of the victor.
Then, Don Quixote being vanquished, the bachelor knight was to command
him to return to his village and his house, and not quit it for two
years, or until he received further orders from him; all which it was
clear Don Quixote would unhesitatingly obey, rather than contravene or
fail to observe the laws of chivalry; and during the period of his
seclusion he might perhaps forget his folly, or there might be an
opportunity of discovering some ready remedy for his madness. Carrasco
undertook the task, and Tom Cecial, a gossip and neighbour of Sancho
Panza's, a lively, feather-headed fellow, offered himself as his
squire. Carrasco armed himself in the fashion described, and Tom
Cecial, that he might not be known by his gossip when they met, fitted
on over his own natural nose the false masquerade one that has been
mentioned; and so they followed the same route Don Quixote took, and
almost came up with him in time to be present at the adventure of the
cart of Death and finally encountered them in the grove, where all
that the sagacious reader has been reading about took place; and had
it not been for the extraordinary fancies of Don Quixote, and his
conviction that the bachelor was not the bachelor, senor bachelor
would have been incapacitated for ever from taking his degree of
licentiate, all through not finding nests where he thought to find
birds. Tom Cecial, seeing how ill they had succeeded, and what a sorry
end their expedition had come to, said to the bachelor, "Sure enough,
Senor Samson Carrasco, we are served right; it is easy enough to plan
and set about an enterprise, but it is often a difficult matter to
come well out of it. Don Quixote a madman, and we sane; he goes off
laughing, safe, and sound, and you are left sore and sorry! I'd like
to know now which is the madder, he who is so because he cannot help
it, or he who is so of his own accord can leave off being one whenever
he likes." "In that case," said Tom Cecial, "I was a madman of my own
accord when I volunteered to become your squire, and, of my own
accord, I'll leave off being one and go home." "That's your affair,"
returned Samson, "but to suppose that I am going home until I have
given Don Quixote a thrashing is absurd; and it is not any wish that
he may recover his senses that will make me hunt him out now, but a
wish for the sore pain I am in with my ribs won't let me entertain
more charitable thoughts." Thus discoursing, the pair proceeded until
they reached a town where it was their good luck to find a
bone-setter, with whose help the unfortunate Samson was cured. Tom
Cecial left him and went home, while he stayed behind meditating
vengeance; and the history will return to him again at the proper
time, so as not to omit making merry with Don Quixote now. CHAPTER
XVI. OF WHAT BEFELL DON QUIXOTE WITH A DISCREET GENTLEMAN OF LA MANCHA
Don Quixote pursued his journey in the high spirits, satisfaction, and
self-complacency already described, fancying himself the most valorous
knight-errant of the age in the world because of his late victory. All
the adventures that could befall him from that time forth he regarded
as already done and brought to a happy issue; he made light of
enchantments and enchanters; he thought no more of the countless
drubbings that had been administered to him in the course of his
knight-errantry, nor of the volley of stones that had levelled half
his teeth, nor of the ingratitude of the galley slaves, nor of the
audacity of the Yanguesans and the shower of stakes that fell upon
him; in short, he said to himself that could he discover any means,
mode, or way of disenchanting his lady Dulcinea, he would not envy the
highest fortune that the most fortunate knight-errant of yore ever
reached or could reach. He was going along entirely absorbed in these
fancies, when Sancho said to him, "Isn't it odd, senor, that I have
still before my eyes that monstrous enormous nose of my gossip, Tom
Cecial?" "And dost thou, then, believe, Sancho," said Don Quixote,
"that the Knight of the Mirrors was the bachelor Carrasco, and his
squire Tom Cecial thy gossip?" "I don't know what to say to that,"
replied Sancho; "all I know is that the tokens he gave me about my own
house, wife and children, nobody else but himself could have given me;
and the face, once the nose was off, was the very face of Tom Cecial,
as I have seen it many a time in my town and next door to my own
house; and the sound of the voice was just the same." "Let us reason
the matter, Sancho," said Don Quixote. "Come now, by what process of
thinking can it be supposed that the bachelor Samson Carrasco would
come as a knight-errant, in arms offensive and defensive, to fight
with me? Have I ever been by any chance his enemy? Have I ever given
him any occasion to owe me a grudge? Am I his rival, or does he
profess arms, that he should envy the fame I have acquired in them?"
"Well, but what are we to say, senor," returned Sancho, "about that
knight, whoever he is, being so like the bachelor Carrasco, and his
squire so like my gossip, Tom Cecial? And if that be enchantment, as
your worship says, was there no other pair in the world for them to
take the likeness of?" "It is all," said Don Quixote, "a scheme and
plot of the malignant magicians that persecute me, who, foreseeing
that I was to be victorious in the conflict, arranged that the
vanquished knight should display the countenance of my friend the
bachelor, in order that the friendship I bear him should interpose to
stay the edge of my sword and might of my arm, and temper the just
wrath of my heart; so that he who sought to take my life by fraud and
falsehood should save his own. And to prove it, thou knowest already,
Sancho, by experience which cannot lie or deceive, how easy it is for
enchanters to change one countenance into another, turning fair into
foul, and foul into fair; for it is not two days since thou sawest
with thine own eyes the beauty and elegance of the peerless Dulcinea
in all its perfection and natural harmony, while I saw her in the
repulsive and mean form of a coarse country wench, with cataracts in
her eyes and a foul smell in her mouth; and when the perverse
enchanter ventured to effect so wicked a transformation, it is no
wonder if he effected that of Samson Carrasco and thy gossip in order
to snatch the glory of victory out of my grasp. For all that, however,
I console myself, because, after all, in whatever shape he may have
been, I have victorious over my enemy." "God knows what's the truth of
it all," said Sancho; and knowing as he did that the transformation of
Dulcinea had been a device and imposition of his own, his master's
illusions were not satisfactory to him; but he did not like to reply
lest he should say something that might disclose his trickery. As they
were engaged in this conversation they were overtaken by a man who was
following the same road behind them, mounted on a very handsome
flea-bitten mare, and dressed in a gaban of fine green cloth, with
tawny velvet facings, and a montera of the same velvet. The trappings
of the mare were of the field and jineta fashion, and of mulberry
colour and green. He carried a Moorish cutlass hanging from a broad
green and gold baldric; the buskins were of the same make as the
baldric; the spurs were not gilt, but lacquered green, and so brightly
polished that, matching as they did the rest of his apparel, they
looked better than if they had been of pure gold. When the traveller
came up with them he saluted them courteously, and spurring his mare
was passing them without stopping, but Don Quixote called out to him,
"Gallant sir, if so be your worship is going our road, and has no
occasion for speed, it would be a pleasure to me if we were to join
company." "In truth," replied he on the mare, "I would not pass you so
hastily but for fear that horse might turn restive in the company of
my mare." "You may safely hold in your mare, senor," said Sancho in
reply to this, "for our horse is the most virtuous and well-behaved
horse in the world; he never does anything wrong on such occasions,
and the only time he misbehaved, my master and I suffered for it
sevenfold; I say again your worship may pull up if you like; for if
she was offered to him between two plates the horse would not hanker
after her." The traveller drew rein, amazed at the trim and features
of Don Quixote, who rode without his helmet, which Sancho carried like
a valise in front of Dapple's pack-saddle; and if the man in green
examined Don Quixote closely, still more closely did Don Quixote
examine the man in green, who struck him as being a man of
intelligence. In appearance he was about fifty years of age, with but
few grey hairs, an aquiline cast of features, and an expression
between grave and gay; and his dress and accoutrements showed him to
be a man of good condition. What he in green thought of Don Quixote of
La Mancha was that a man of that sort and shape he had never yet seen;
he marvelled at the length of his hair, his lofty stature, the
lankness and sallowness of his countenance, his armour, his bearing
and his gravity--a figure and picture such as had not been seen in
those regions for many a long day. Don Quixote saw very plainly the
attention with which the traveller was regarding him, and read his
curiosity in his astonishment; and courteous as he was and ready to
please everybody, before the other could ask him any question he
anticipated him by saying, "The appearance I present to your worship
being so strange and so out of the common, I should not be surprised
if it filled you with wonder; but you will cease to wonder when I tell
you, as I do, that I am one of those knights who, as people say, go
seeking adventures. I have left my home, I have mortgaged my estate, I
have given up my comforts, and committed myself to the arms of
Fortune, to bear me whithersoever she may please. My desire was to
bring to life again knight-errantry, now dead, and for some time past,
stumbling here, falling there, now coming down headlong, now raising
myself up again, I have carried out a great portion of my design,
succouring widows, protecting maidens, and giving aid to wives,
orphans, and minors, the proper and natural duty of knights-errant;
and, therefore, because of my many valiant and Christian achievements,
I have been already found worthy to make my way in print to well-nigh
all, or most, of the nations of the earth. Thirty thousand volumes of
my history have been printed, and it is on the high-road to be printed
thirty thousand thousands of times, if heaven does not put a stop to
it. In short, to sum up all in a few words, or in a single one, I may
tell you I am Don Quixote of La Mancha, otherwise called 'The Knight
of the Rueful Countenance.'" Don Quixote had by this time placed
himself on his knees beside Sancho, and, with eyes starting out of his
head and a puzzled gaze, was regarding her whom Sancho called queen
and lady; and as he could see nothing in her except a village lass,
and not a very well-favoured one, for she was platter-faced and
snub-nosed, he was perplexed and bewildered, and did not venture to
open his lips. The country girls, at the same time, were astonished to
see these two men, so different in appearance, on their knees,
preventing their companion from going on. She, however, who had been
stopped, breaking silence, said angrily and testily, "Get out of the
way, bad luck to you, and let us pass, for we are in a hurry." To
which Sancho returned, "Oh, princess and universal lady of El Toboso,
is not your magnanimous heart softened by seeing the pillar and prop
of knight-errantry on his knees before your sublimated presence?" On
hearing this, one of the others exclaimed, "Woa then! why, I'm rubbing
thee down, she-ass of my father-in-law! See how the lordlings come to
make game of the village girls now, as if we here could not chaff as
well as themselves. Go your own way, and let us go ours, and it will
be better for you." "Get up, Sancho," said Don Quixote at this; "I see
that fortune, 'with evil done to me unsated still,' has taken
possession of all the roads by which any comfort may reach 'this
wretched soul' that I carry in my flesh. And thou, highest perfection
of excellence that can be desired, utmost limit of grace in human
shape, sole relief of this afflicted heart that adores thee, though
the malign enchanter that persecutes me has brought clouds and
cataracts on my eyes, and to them, and them only, transformed thy
unparagoned beauty and changed thy features into those of a poor
peasant girl, if so be he has not at the same time changed mine into
those of some monster to render them loathsome in thy sight, refuse
not to look upon me with tenderness and love; seeing in this
submission that I make on my knees to thy transformed beauty the
humility with which my soul adores thee." "Hey-day! My grandfather!"
cried the girl, "much I care for your love-making! Get out of the way
and let us pass, and we'll thank you." Sancho stood aside and let her
go, very well pleased to have got so well out of the hobble he was in.
The instant the village lass who had done duty for Dulcinea found
herself free, prodding her "cackney" with a spike she had at the end
of a stick, she set off at full speed across the field. The she-ass,
however, feeling the point more acutely than usual, began cutting such
capers, that it flung the lady Dulcinea to the ground; seeing which,
Don Quixote ran to raise her up, and Sancho to fix and girth the
pack-saddle, which also had slipped under the ass's belly. The
pack-saddle being secured, as Don Quixote was about to lift up his
enchanted mistress in his arms and put her upon her beast, the lady,
getting up from the ground, saved him the trouble, for, going back a
little, she took a short run, and putting both hands on the croup of
the ass she dropped into the saddle more lightly than a falcon, and
sat astride like a man, whereat Sancho said, "Rogue! but our lady is
lighter than a lanner, and might teach the cleverest Cordovan or
Mexican how to mount; she cleared the back of the saddle in one jump,
and without spurs she is making the hackney go like a zebra; and her
damsels are no way behind her, for they all fly like the wind;" which
was the truth, for as soon as they saw Dulcinea mounted, they pushed
on after her, and sped away without looking back, for more than half a
league. Don Quixote followed them with his eyes, and when they were no
longer in sight, he turned to Sancho and said, "How now, Sancho? thou
seest how I am hated by enchanters! And see to what a length the
malice and spite they bear me go, when they seek to deprive me of the
happiness it would give me to see my lady in her own proper form. The
fact is I was born to be an example of misfortune, and the target and
mark at which the arrows of adversity are aimed and directed. Observe
too, Sancho, that these traitors were not content with changing and
transforming my Dulcinea, but they transformed and changed her into a
shape as mean and ill-favoured as that of the village girl yonder; and
at the same time they robbed her of that which is such a peculiar
property of ladies of distinction, that is to say, the sweet fragrance
that comes of being always among perfumes and flowers. For I must tell
thee, Sancho, that when I approached to put Dulcinea upon her hackney
(as thou sayest it was, though to me it appeared a she-ass), she gave
me a whiff of raw garlic that made my head reel, and poisoned my very
heart." "O scum of the earth!" cried Sancho at this, "O miserable,
spiteful enchanters! O that I could see you all strung by the gills,
like sardines on a twig! Ye know a great deal, ye can do a great deal,
and ye do a great deal more. It ought to have been enough for you, ye
scoundrels, to have changed the pearls of my lady's eyes into oak
galls, and her hair of purest gold into the bristles of a red ox's
tail, and in short, all her features from fair to foul, without
meddling with her smell; for by that we might somehow have found out
what was hidden underneath that ugly rind; though, to tell the truth,
I never perceived her ugliness, but only her beauty, which was raised
to the highest pitch of perfection by a mole she had on her right lip,
like a moustache, with seven or eight red hairs like threads of gold,
and more than a palm long." "From the correspondence which exists
between those of the face and those of the body," said Don Quixote,
"Dulcinea must have another mole resembling that on the thick of the
thigh on that side on which she has the one on her ace; but hairs of
the length thou hast mentioned are very long for moles." "Well, all I
can say is there they were as plain as could be," replied Sancho. "I
believe it, my friend," returned Don Quixote; "for nature bestowed
nothing on Dulcinea that was not perfect and well-finished; and so, if
she had a hundred moles like the one thou hast described, in her they
would not be moles, but moons and shining stars. But tell me, Sancho,
that which seemed to me to be a pack-saddle as thou wert fixing it,
was it a flat-saddle or a side-saddle?" "It was neither," replied
Sancho, "but a jineta saddle, with a field covering worth half a
kingdom, so rich is it." "And that I could not see all this, Sancho!"
said Don Quixote; "once more I say, and will say a thousand times, I
am the most unfortunate of men." Sancho, the rogue, had enough to do
to hide his laughter, at hearing the simplicity of the master he had
so nicely befooled. At length, after a good deal more conversation had
passed between them, they remounted their beasts, and followed the
road to Saragossa, which they expected to reach in time to take part
in a certain grand festival which is held every year in that
illustrious city; but before they got there things happened to them,
so many, so important, and so strange, that they deserve to be
recorded and read, as will be seen farther on. CHAPTER L. WHEREIN IS
SET FORTH WHO THE ENCHANTERS AND EXECUTIONERS WERE WHO FLOGGED THE
DUENNA AND PINCHED DON QUIXOTE, AND ALSO WHAT BEFELL THE PAGE WHO
CARRIED THE LETTER TO TERESA PANZA, SANCHO PANZA'S WIFE CHAPTER LI OF
THE PROGRESS OF SANCHO'S GOVERNMENT, AND OTHER SUCH ENTERTAINING
MATTERS Day came after the night of the governor's round; a night
which the head-carver passed without sleeping, so were his thoughts of
the face and air and beauty of the disguised damsel, while the
majordomo spent what was left of it in writing an account to his lord
and lady of all Sancho said and did, being as much amazed at his
sayings as at his doings, for there was a mixture of shrewdness and
simplicity in all his words and deeds. The senor governor got up, and
by Doctor Pedro Recio's directions they made him break his fast on a
little conserve and four sups of cold water, which Sancho would have
readily exchanged for a piece of bread and a bunch of grapes; but
seeing there was no help for it, he submitted with no little sorrow of
heart and discomfort of stomach; Pedro Recio having persuaded him that
light and delicate diet enlivened the wits, and that was what was most
essential for persons placed in command and in responsible situations,
where they have to employ not only the bodily powers but those of the
mind also. By means of this sophistry Sancho was made to endure
hunger, and hunger so keen that in his heart he cursed the government,
and even him who had given it to him; however, with his hunger and his
conserve he undertook to deliver judgments that day, and the first
thing that came before him was a question that was submitted to him by
a stranger, in the presence of the majordomo and the other attendants,
and it was in these words: "Senor, a large river separated two
districts of one and the same lordship--will your worship please to
pay attention, for the case is an important and a rather knotty one?
Well then, on this river there was a bridge, and at one end of it a
gallows, and a sort of tribunal, where four judges commonly sat to
administer the law which the lord of river, bridge and the lordship
had enacted, and which was to this effect, 'If anyone crosses by this
bridge from one side to the other he shall declare on oath where he is
going to and with what object; and if he swears truly, he shall be
allowed to pass, but if falsely, he shall be put to death for it by
hanging on the gallows erected there, without any remission.' Though
the law and its severe penalty were known, many persons crossed, but
in their declarations it was easy to see at once they were telling the
truth, and the judges let them pass free. It happened, however, that
one man, when they came to take his declaration, swore and said that
by the oath he took he was going to die upon that gallows that stood
there, and nothing else. The judges held a consultation over the oath,
and they said, 'If we let this man pass free he has sworn falsely, and
by the law he ought to die; but if we hang him, as he swore he was
going to die on that gallows, and therefore swore the truth, by the
same law he ought to go free.' It is asked of your worship, senor
governor, what are the judges to do with this man? For they are still
in doubt and perplexity; and having heard of your worship's acute and
exalted intellect, they have sent me to entreat your worship on their
behalf to give your opinion on this very intricate and puzzling case."
To this Sancho made answer, "Indeed those gentlemen the judges that
send you to me might have spared themselves the trouble, for I have
more of the obtuse than the acute in me; but repeat the case over
again, so that I may understand it, and then perhaps I may be able to
hit the point." The querist repeated again and again what he had said
before, and then Sancho said, "It seems to me I can set the matter
right in a moment, and in this way; the man swears that he is going to
die upon the gallows; but if he dies upon it, he has sworn the truth,
and by the law enacted deserves to go free and pass over the bridge;
but if they don't hang him, then he has sworn falsely, and by the same
law deserves to be hanged." "It is as the senor governor says," said
the messenger; "and as regards a complete comprehension of the case,
there is nothing left to desire or hesitate about." "Well then I say,"
said Sancho, "that of this man they should let pass the part that has
sworn truly, and hang the part that has lied; and in this way the
conditions of the passage will be fully complied with." "But then,
senor governor," replied the querist, "the man will have to be divided
into two parts; and if he is divided of course he will die; and so
none of the requirements of the law will be carried out, and it is
absolutely necessary to comply with it." "Look here, my good sir,"
said Sancho; "either I'm a numskull or else there is the same reason
for this passenger dying as for his living and passing over the
bridge; for if the truth saves him the falsehood equally condemns him;
and that being the case it is my opinion you should say to the
gentlemen who sent you to me that as the arguments for condemning him
and for absolving him are exactly balanced, they should let him pass
freely, as it is always more praiseworthy to do good than to do evil;
this I would give signed with my name if I knew how to sign; and what
I have said in this case is not out of my own head, but one of the
many precepts my master Don Quixote gave me the night before I left to
become governor of this island, that came into my mind, and it was
this, that when there was any doubt about the justice of a case I
should lean to mercy; and it is God's will that I should recollect it
now, for it fits this case as if it was made for it." "That is true,"
said the majordomo; "and I maintain that Lycurgus himself, who gave
laws to the Lacedemonians, could not have pronounced a better decision
than the great Panza has given; let the morning's audience close with
this, and I will see that the senor governor has dinner entirely to
his liking." "That's all I ask for--fair play," said Sancho; "give me
my dinner, and then let it rain cases and questions on me, and I'll
despatch them in a twinkling." The majordomo kept his word, for he
felt it against his conscience to kill so wise a governor by hunger;
particularly as he intended to have done with him that same night,
playing off the last joke he was commissioned to practise upon him. It
came to pass, then, that after he had dined that day, in opposition to
the rules and aphorisms of Doctor Tirteafuera, as they were taking
away the cloth there came a courier with a letter from Don Quixote for
the governor. Sancho ordered the secretary to read it to himself, and
if there was nothing in it that demanded secrecy to read it aloud. The
secretary did so, and after he had skimmed the contents he said, "It
may well be read aloud, for what Senor Don Quixote writes to your
worship deserves to be printed or written in letters of gold, and it
is as follows." DON QUIXOTE OF LA MANCHA'S LETTER TO SANCHO PANZA,
GOVERNOR OF THE ISLAND OF BARATARIA. When I was expecting to hear of
thy stupidities and blunders, friend Sancho, I have received
intelligence of thy displays of good sense, for which I give special
thanks to heaven that can raise the poor from the dunghill and of
fools to make wise men. They tell me thou dost govern as if thou wert
a man, and art a man as if thou wert a beast, so great is the humility
wherewith thou dost comport thyself. But I would have thee bear in
mind, Sancho, that very often it is fitting and necessary for the
authority of office to resist the humility of the heart; for the
seemly array of one who is invested with grave duties should be such
as they require and not measured by what his own humble tastes may
lead him to prefer. Dress well; a stick dressed up does not look like
a stick; I do not say thou shouldst wear trinkets or fine raiment, or
that being a judge thou shouldst dress like a soldier, but that thou
shouldst array thyself in the apparel thy office requires, and that at
the same time it be neat and handsome. To win the good-will of the
people thou governest there are two things, among others, that thou
must do; one is to be civil to all (this, however, I told thee
before), and the other to take care that food be abundant, for there
is nothing that vexes the heart of the poor more than hunger and high
prices. Make not many proclamations; but those thou makest take care
that they be good ones, and above all that they be observed and
carried out; for proclamations that are not observed are the same as
if they did not exist; nay, they encourage the idea that the prince
who had the wisdom and authority to make them had not the power to
enforce them; and laws that threaten and are not enforced come to be
like the log, the king of the frogs, that frightened them at first,
but that in time they despised and mounted upon. Be a father to virtue
and a stepfather to vice. Be not always strict, nor yet always
lenient, but observe a mean between these two extremes, for in that is
the aim of wisdom. Visit the gaols, the slaughter-houses, and the
market-places; for the presence of the governor is of great importance
in such places; it comforts the prisoners who are in hopes of a speedy
release, it is the bugbear of the butchers who have then to give just
weight, and it is the terror of the market-women for the same reason.
Let it not be seen that thou art (even if perchance thou art, which I
do not believe) covetous, a follower of women, or a glutton; for when
the people and those that have dealings with thee become aware of thy
special weakness they will bring their batteries to bear upon thee in
that quarter, till they have brought thee down to the depths of
perdition. Consider and reconsider, con and con over again the advices
and the instructions I gave thee before thy departure hence to thy
government, and thou wilt see that in them, if thou dost follow them,
thou hast a help at hand that will lighten for thee the troubles and
difficulties that beset governors at every step. Write to thy lord and
lady and show thyself grateful to them, for ingratitude is the
daughter of pride, and one of the greatest sins we know of; and he who
is grateful to those who have been good to him shows that he will be
so to God also who has bestowed and still bestows so many blessings
upon him. My lady the duchess sent off a messenger with thy suit and
another present to thy wife Teresa Panza; we expect the answer every
moment. I have been a little indisposed through a certain scratching I
came in for, not very much to the benefit of my nose; but it was
nothing; for if there are enchanters who maltreat me, there are also
some who defend me. Let me know if the majordomo who is with thee had
any share in the Trifaldi performance, as thou didst suspect; and keep
me informed of everything that happens thee, as the distance is so
short; all the more as I am thinking of giving over very shortly this
idle life I am now leading, for I was not born for it. A thing has
occurred to me which I am inclined to think will put me out of favour
with the duke and duchess; but though I am sorry for it I do not care,
for after all I must obey my calling rather than their pleasure, in
accordance with the common saying, amicus Plato, sed magis amica
veritas. I quote this Latin to thee because I conclude that since thou
hast been a governor thou wilt have learned it. Adieu; God keep thee
from being an object of pity to anyone. Thy friend, DON QUIXOTE OF LA
MANCHA. Sancho listened to the letter with great attention, and it was
praised and considered wise by all who heard it; he then rose up from
table, and calling his secretary shut himself in with him in his own
room, and without putting it off any longer set about answering his
master Don Quixote at once; and he bade the secretary write down what
he told him without adding or suppressing anything, which he did, and
the answer was to the following effect. SANCHO PANZA'S LETTER TO DON
QUIXOTE OF LA MANCHA. The pressure of business is so great upon me
that I have no time to scratch my head or even to cut my nails; and I
have them so long-God send a remedy for it. I say this, master of my
soul, that you may not be surprised if I have not until now sent you
word of how I fare, well or ill, in this government, in which I am
suffering more hunger than when we two were wandering through the
woods and wastes. My lord the duke wrote to me the other day to warn
me that certain spies had got into this island to kill me; but up to
the present I have not heard of any defamatory verse against the Lady
Angelica, who turned the world upside down." "Strange," said the
curate; but at this moment they heard the housekeeper and the niece,
who had previously withdrawn from the conversation, exclaiming aloud
in the courtyard, and at the noise they all ran out. CHAPTER II. WHICH
TREATS OF THE NOTABLE ALTERCATION WHICH SANCHO PANZA HAD WITH DON
QUIXOTE'S NIECE, AND HOUSEKEEPER, TOGETHER WITH OTHER DROLL MATTERS
CHAPTER III OF THE LAUGHABLE CONVERSATION THAT PASSED BETWEEN DON
QUIXOTE, SANCHO PANZA, AND THE BACHELOR SAMSON CARRASCO Don Quixote
remained very deep in thought, waiting for the bachelor Carrasco, from
whom he was to hear how he himself had been put into a book as Sancho
said; and he could not persuade himself that any such history could be
in existence, for the blood of the enemies he had slain was not yet
dry on the blade of his sword, and now they wanted to make out that
his mighty achievements were going about in print. For all that, he
fancied some sage, either a friend or an enemy, might, by the aid of
magic, have given them to the press; if a friend, in order to magnify
and exalt them above the most famous ever achieved by any
knight-errant; if an enemy, to bring them to naught and degrade them
below the meanest ever recorded of any low squire, though as he said
to himself, the achievements of squires never were recorded. If,
however, it were the fact that such a history were in existence, it
must necessarily, being the story of a knight-errant, be
grandiloquent, lofty, imposing, grand and true. With this he comforted
himself somewhat, though it made him uncomfortable to think that the
author was a Moor, judging by the title of "Cide;" and that no truth
was to be looked for from Moors, as they are all impostors, cheats,
and schemers. He was afraid he might have dealt with his love affairs
in some indecorous fashion, that might tend to the discredit and
prejudice of the purity of his lady Dulcinea del Toboso; he would have
had him set forth the fidelity and respect he had always observed
towards her, spurning queens, empresses, and damsels of all sorts, and
keeping in check the impetuosity of his natural impulses. Absorbed and
wrapped up in these and divers other cogitations, he was found by
Sancho and Carrasco, whom Don Quixote received with great courtesy.
The bachelor, though he was called Samson, was of no great bodily
size, but he was a very great wag; he was of a sallow complexion, but
very sharp-witted, somewhere about four-and-twenty years of age, with
a round face, a flat nose, and a large mouth, all indications of a
mischievous disposition and a love of fun and jokes; and of this he
gave a sample as soon as he saw Don Quixote, by falling on his knees
before him and saying, "Let me kiss your mightiness's hand, Senor Don
Quixote of La Mancha, for, by the habit of St. Peter that I wear,
though I have no more than the first four orders, your worship is one
of the most famous knights-errant that have ever been, or will be, all
the world over. A blessing on Cide Hamete Benengeli, who has written
the history of your great deeds, and a double blessing on that
connoisseur who took the trouble of having it translated out of the
Arabic into our Castilian vulgar tongue for the universal
entertainment of the people!" Don Quixote made him rise, and said,
"So, then, it is true that there is a history of me, and that it was a
Moor and a sage who wrote it?" "So true is it, senor," said Samson,
"that my belief is there are more than twelve thousand volumes of the
said history in print this very day. Only ask Portugal, Barcelona, and
Valencia, where they have been printed, and moreover there is a report
that it is being printed at Antwerp, and I am persuaded there will not
be a country or language in which there will not be a translation of
it." "One of the things," here observed Don Quixote, "that ought to
give most pleasure to a virtuous and eminent man is to find himself in
his lifetime in print and in type, familiar in people's mouths with a
good name; I say with a good name, for if it be the opposite, then
there is no death to be compared to it." "If it goes by good name and
fame," said the bachelor, "your worship alone bears away the palm from
all the knights-errant; for the Moor in his own language, and the
Christian in his, have taken care to set before us your gallantry,
your high courage in encountering dangers, your fortitude in
adversity, your patience under misfortunes as well as wounds, the
purity and continence of the platonic loves of your worship and my
lady Dona Dulcinea del Toboso-" "I never heard my lady Dulcinea called
Dona," observed Sancho here; "nothing more than the lady Dulcinea del
Toboso; so here already the history is wrong." "That is not an
objection of any importance," replied Carrasco. "Certainly not," said
Don Quixote; "but tell me, senor bachelor, what deeds of mine are they
that are made most of in this history?" "On that point," replied the
bachelor, "opinions differ, as tastes do; some swear by the adventure
of the windmills that your worship took to be Briareuses and giants;
others by that of the fulling mills; one cries up the description of
the two armies that afterwards took the appearance of two droves of
sheep; another that of the dead body on its way to be buried at
Segovia; a third says the liberation of the galley slaves is the best
of all, and a fourth that nothing comes up to the affair with the
Benedictine giants, and the battle with the valiant Biscayan." "Tell
me, senor bachelor," said Sancho at this point, "does the adventure
with the Yanguesans come in, when our good Rocinante went hankering
after dainties?" "The sage has left nothing in the ink-bottle,"
replied Samson; "he tells all and sets down everything, even to the
capers that worthy Sancho cut in the blanket." "I cut no capers in the
blanket," returned Sancho; "in the air I did, and more of them than I
liked." "There is no human history in the world, I suppose," said Don
Quixote, "that has not its ups and downs, but more than others such as
deal with chivalry, for they can never be entirely made up of
prosperous adventures." "For all that," replied the bachelor, "there
are those who have read the history who say they would have been glad
if the author had left out some of the countless cudgellings that were
inflicted on Senor Don Quixote in various encounters." "That's where
the truth of the history comes in," said Sancho. "At the same time
they might fairly have passed them over in silence," observed Don
Quixote; "for there is no need of recording events which do not change
or affect the truth of a history, if they tend to bring the hero of it
into contempt. AEneas was not in truth and earnest so pious as Virgil
represents him, nor Ulysses so wise as Homer describes him." "That is
true," said Samson; "but it is one thing to write as a poet, another
to write as a historian; the poet may describe or sing things, not as
they were, but as they ought to be, so as to leave the example of
their virtues to posterity. In the same way Amadis was the polestar,
day-star, sun of valiant and devoted knights, whom all we who fight
under the banner of love and chivalry are bound to imitate. This,
then, being so, I consider, friend Sancho, that the knight-errant who
shall imitate him most closely will come nearest to reaching the
perfection of chivalry. Now one of the instances in which this knight
most conspicuously showed his prudence, worth, valour, endurance,
fortitude, and love, was when he withdrew, rejected by the Lady
Oriana, to do penance upon the Pena Pobre, changing his name into that
of Beltenebros, a name assuredly significant and appropriate to the
life which he had voluntarily adopted. So, as it is easier for me to
imitate him in this than in cleaving giants asunder, cutting off
serpents' heads, slaying dragons, routing armies, destroying fleets,
and breaking enchantments, and as this place is so well suited for a
similar purpose, I must not allow the opportunity to escape which now
so conveniently offers me its forelock." "What is it in reality," said
Sancho, "that your worship means to do in such an out-of-the-way place
as this?" "Have I not told thee," answered Don Quixote, "that I mean
to imitate Amadis here, playing the victim of despair, the madman, the
maniac, so as at the same time to imitate the valiant Don Roland, when
at the fountain he had evidence of the fair Angelica having disgraced
herself with Medoro and through grief thereat went mad, and plucked up
trees, troubled the waters of the clear springs, slew destroyed
flocks, burned down huts, levelled houses, dragged mares after him,
and perpetrated a hundred thousand other outrages worthy of
everlasting renown and record? And though I have no intention of
imitating Roland, or Orlando, or Rotolando (for he went by all these
names), step by step in all the mad things he did, said, and thought,
I will make a rough copy to the best of my power of all that seems to
me most essential; but perhaps I shall content myself with the simple
imitation of Amadis, who without giving way to any mischievous madness
but merely to tears and sorrow, gained as much fame as the most
famous." "It seems to me," said Sancho, "that the knights who behaved
in this way had provocation and cause for those follies and penances;
but what cause has your worship for going mad? What lady has rejected
you, or what evidence have you found to prove that the lady Dulcinea
del Toboso has been trifling with Moor or Christian?" "There is the
point," replied Don Quixote, "and that is the beauty of this business
of mine; no thanks to a knight-errant for going mad when he has cause;
the thing is to turn crazy without any provocation, and let my lady
know, if I do this in the dry, what I would do in the moist; moreover
I have abundant cause in the long separation I have endured from my
lady till death, Dulcinea del Toboso; for as thou didst hear that
shepherd Ambrosio say the other day, in absence all ills are felt and
feared; and so, friend Sancho, waste no time in advising me against so
rare, so happy, and so unheard-of an imitation; mad I am, and mad I
must be until thou returnest with the answer to a letter that I mean
to send by thee to my lady Dulcinea; and if it be such as my constancy
deserves, my insanity and penance will come to an end; and if it be to
the opposite effect, I shall become mad in earnest, and, being so, I
shall suffer no more; thus in whatever way she may answer I shall
escape from the struggle and affliction in which thou wilt leave me,
enjoying in my senses the boon thou bearest me, or as a madman not
feeling the evil thou bringest me. But tell me, Sancho, hast thou got
Mambrino's helmet safe? for I saw thee take it up from the ground when
that ungrateful wretch tried to break it in pieces but could not, by
which the fineness of its temper may be seen." To which Sancho made
answer, "By the living God, Sir Knight of the Rueful Countenance, I
say you not only may and ought to do mad freaks for her sake, but you
have a good right to give way to despair and hang yourself; and no one
who knows of it but will say you did well, though the devil should
take you; and I wish I were on my road already, simply to see her, for
it is many a day since I saw her, and she must be altered by this
time, for going about the fields always, and the sun and the air spoil
women's looks greatly. But I must own the truth to your worship, Senor
Don Quixote; until now I have been under a great mistake, for I
believed truly and honestly that the lady Dulcinea must be some
princess your worship was in love with, or some person great enough to
deserve the rich presents you have sent her, such as the Biscayan and
the galley slaves, and many more no doubt, for your worship must have
won many victories in the time when I was not yet your squire. But all
things considered, what good can it do the lady Aldonza Lorenzo, I
mean the lady Dulcinea del Toboso, nor took Don Quixote's letter to
her, for it was left in the memorandum book in the Sierra Morena, how
did he dare to invent the answer and all that about finding her
sifting wheat, the whole story being a deception and falsehood, and so
much to the prejudice of the Empresses and Queens of the Alcarria and
Estremadura, your worship will be pleased to show us some portrait of
this lady, though it be no bigger than a grain of wheat; for by the
thread one gets at the ball, and in this way we shall be able to baste
one another without doing ourselves any harm or mischief." "Body of my
father!" said Sancho, "see what marten and sable, and pads of carded
cotton he is putting into the bags, that our heads may not be broken
and our bones beaten to jelly! But even if they are filled with toss
silk, I can tell you, senor, I am not going to fight; let our masters
fight, that's their lookout, and let us drink and live; for time will
take care to ease us of our lives, without our going to look for
fillips so that they may be finished off before their proper time
comes and they drop from ripeness." "Still," returned he of the Grove,
"we must fight, if it be only for half an hour." "By no means," said
Sancho; "I am not going to be so discourteous or so ungrateful as to
have any quarrel, be it ever so small, with one I have eaten and drunk
with; besides, who the devil could bring himself to fight in cold
blood, without anger or provocation?" "I can remedy that entirely,"
said he of the Grove, "and in this way: before we begin the battle, I
will come up to your worship fair and softly, and give you three or
four buffets, with which I shall stretch you at my feet and rouse your
anger, though it were sleeping sounder than a dormouse." "To match
that plan," said Sancho, "I have another that is not a whit behind it;
I will take a cudgel, and before your worship comes near enough to
waken my anger I will send yours so sound to sleep with whacks, that
it won't waken unless it be in the other world, where it is known that
I am not a man to let my face be handled by anyone; let each look out
for the arrow--though the surer way would be to let everyone's anger
sleep, for nobody knows the heart of anyone, and a man may come for
wool and go back shorn; God gave his blessing to peace and his curse
to quarrels; if a hunted cat, surrounded and hard pressed, turns into
a lion, God knows what I, who am a man, may turn into; and so from
this time forth I warn you, sir squire, that all the harm and mischief
that may come of our quarrel will be put down to your account." "Very
good," said he of the Grove; "God will send the dawn and we shall be
all right." "Sleep thou, Sancho," returned Don Quixote, "for thou wast
born to sleep as I was born to watch; and during the time it now wants
of dawn I will give a loose rein to my thoughts, and seek a vent for
them in a little madrigal which, unknown to thee, I composed in my
head last night." "I should think," said Sancho, "that the thoughts
that allow one to make verses cannot be of great consequence; let your
worship string verses as much as you like and I'll sleep as much as I
can;" and forthwith, taking the space of ground he required, he
muffled himself up and fell into a sound sleep, undisturbed by bond,
debt, or trouble of any sort. Don Quixote, propped up against the
trunk of a beech or a cork tree--for Cide Hamete does not specify what
kind of tree it was--sang in this strain to the accompaniment of his
own sighs: When in my mind I muse, O Love, upon thy cruelty, To death
I flee, In hope therein the end of all to find. But drawing near That
welcome haven in my sea of woe, Such joy I know, That life revives,
and still I linger here. Thus life doth slay, And death again to life
restoreth me; Strange destiny, That deals with life and death as with
a play! He accompanied each verse with many sighs and not a few tears,
just like one whose heart was pierced with grief at his defeat and his
separation from Dulcinea. And now daylight came, and the sun smote
Sancho on the eyes with his beams. He awoke, roused himself up, shook
himself and stretched his lazy limbs, and seeing the havoc the pigs
had made with his stores he cursed the drove, and more besides. Then
the pair resumed their journey, and as evening closed in they saw
coming towards them some ten men on horseback and four or five on
foot. Don Quixote's heart beat quick and Sancho's quailed with fear,
for the persons approaching them carried lances and bucklers, and were
in very warlike guise. Don Quixote turned to Sancho and said, "If I
could make use of my weapons, and my promise had not tied my hands, I
would count this host that comes against us but cakes and fancy bread;
but perhaps it may prove something different from what we apprehend."
The men on horseback now came up, and raising their lances surrounded
Don Quixote in silence, and pointed them at his back and breast,
menacing him with death. One of those on foot, putting his finger to
his lips as a sign to him to be silent, seized Rocinante's bridle and
drew him out of the road, and the others driving Sancho and Dapple
before them, and all maintaining a strange silence, followed in the
steps of the one who led Don Quixote. The latter two or three times
attempted to ask where they were taking him to and what they wanted,
but the instant he began to open his lips they threatened to close
them with the points of their lances; and Sancho fared the same way,
for the moment he seemed about to speak one of those on foot punched
him with a goad, and Dapple likewise, as if he too wanted to talk.
Night set in, they quickened their pace, and the fears of the two
prisoners grew greater, especially as they heard themselves assailed
with--"Get on, ye Troglodytes;" "Silence, ye barbarians;" "March, ye
cannibals;" "No murmuring, ye Scythians;" "Don't open your eyes, ye
murderous Polyphemes, ye blood-thirsty lions," and suchlike names with
which their captors harassed the ears of the wretched master and man.
Sancho went along saying to himself, "We, tortolites, barbers,
animals! I don't like those names at all; 'it's in a bad wind our corn
is being winnowed;' 'misfortune comes upon us all at once like sticks
on a dog,' and God grant it may be no worse than them that this
unlucky adventure has in store for us." Don Quixote rode completely
dazed, unable with the aid of all his wits to make out what could be
the meaning of these abusive names they called them, and the only
conclusion he could arrive at was that there was no good to be hoped
for and much evil to be feared. And now, about an hour after midnight,
they reached a castle which Don Quixote saw at once was the duke's,
where they had been but a short time before. "God bless me!" said he,
as he recognised the mansion, "what does this mean? It is all courtesy
and politeness in this house; but with the vanquished good turns into
evil, and evil into worse." They entered the chief court of the castle
and found it prepared and fitted up in a style that added to their
amazement and doubled their fears, as will be seen in the following
chapter. CHAPTER LXIX. OF THE STRANGEST AND MOST EXTRAORDINARY
ADVENTURE THAT BEFELL DON QUIXOTE IN THE WHOLE COURSE OF THIS GREAT
HISTORY The horsemen dismounted, and, together with the men on foot,
without a moment's delay taking up Sancho and Don Quixote bodily, they
carried them into the court, all round which near a hundred torches
fixed in sockets were burning, besides above five hundred lamps in the
corridors, so that in spite of the night, which was somewhat dark, the
want of daylight could not be perceived. In the middle of the court
was a catafalque, raised about two yards above the ground and covered
completely by an immense canopy of black velvet, and on the steps all
round it white wax tapers burned in more than a hundred silver
candlesticks. Upon the catafalque was seen the dead body of a damsel
so lovely that by her beauty she made death itself look beautiful. She
lay with her head resting upon a cushion of brocade and crowned with a
garland of sweet-smelling flowers of divers sorts, her hands crossed
upon her bosom, and between them a branch of yellow palm of victory.
On one side of the court was erected a stage, where upon two chairs
were seated two persons who from having crowns on their heads and
sceptres in their hands appeared to be kings of some sort, whether
real or mock ones. By the side of this stage, which was reached by
steps, were two other chairs on which the men carrying the prisoners
seated Don Quixote and Sancho, all in silence, and by signs giving
them to understand that they too were to be silent; which, however,
they would have been without any signs, for their amazement at all
they saw held them tongue-tied. And now two persons of distinction,
who were at once recognised by Don Quixote as his hosts the duke and
duchess, ascended the stage attended by a numerous suite, and seated
themselves on two gorgeous chairs close to the two kings, as they
seemed to be. Who would not have been amazed at this? Nor was this
all, for Don Quixote had perceived that the dead body on the
catafalque was that of the fair Altisidora. As the duke and duchess
mounted the stage Don Quixote and Sancho rose and made them a profound
obeisance, which they returned by bowing their heads slightly. At this
moment an official crossed over, and approaching Sancho threw over him
a robe of black buckram painted all over with flames of fire, and
taking off his cap put upon his head a mitre such as those undergoing
the sentence of the Holy Office wear; and whispered in his ear that he
must not open his lips, or they would put a gag upon him, or take his
life. Sancho surveyed himself from head to foot and saw himself all
ablaze with flames; but as they did not burn him, he did not care two
farthings for them. He took off the mitre and seeing painted with
devils he put it on again, saying to himself, "Well, so far those
don't burn me nor do these carry me off." Don Quixote surveyed him
too, and though fear had got the better of his faculties, he could not
help smiling to see the figure Sancho presented. And now from
underneath the catafalque, so it seemed, there rose a low sweet sound
of flutes, which, coming unbroken by human voice (for there silence
itself kept silence), had a soft and languishing effect. Then, beside
the pillow of what seemed to be the dead body, suddenly appeared a
fair youth in a Roman habit, who, to the accompaniment of a harp which
he himself played, sang in a sweet and clear voice these two stanzas:
While fair Altisidora, who the sport Of cold Don Quixote's cruelty
hath been, Returns to life, and in this magic court The dames in
sables come to grace the scene, And while her matrons all in seemly
sort My lady robes in baize and bombazine, Her beauty and her sorrows
will I sing With defter quill than touched the Thracian string. But
not in life alone, methinks, to me Belongs the office; Lady, when my
tongue Is cold in death, believe me, unto thee My voice shall raise
its tributary song. My soul, from this strait prison-house set free,
As o'er the Stygian lake it floats along, Thy praises singing still
shall hold its way, And make the waters of oblivion stay. At this
point one of the two that looked like kings exclaimed, "Enough,
enough, divine singer! It would be an endless task to put before us
now the death and the charms of the peerless Altisidora, not dead as
the ignorant world imagines, but living in the voice of fame and in
the penance which Sancho Panza, here present, has to undergo to
restore her to the long-lost light. Do thou, therefore, O
Rhadamanthus, who sittest in judgment with me in the murky caverns of
Dis, as thou knowest all that the inscrutable fates have decreed
touching the resuscitation of this damsel, announce and declare it at
once, that the happiness we look forward to from her restoration be no
longer deferred." No sooner had Minos the fellow judge of Rhadamanthus
said this, than Rhadamanthus rising up said: "Ho, officials of this
house, high and low, great and small, make haste hither one and all,
and print on Sancho's face four-and-twenty smacks, and give him twelve
pinches and six pin thrusts in the back and arms; for upon this
ceremony depends the restoration of Altisidora." On hearing this
Sancho broke silence and cried out, "By all that's good, I'll as soon
let my face be smacked or handled as turn Moor. Body o' me! What has
handling my face got to do with the resurrection of this damsel? 'The
old woman took kindly to the blits; they enchant Dulcinea, and whip me
in order to disenchant her; Altisidora dies of ailments God was
pleased to send her, and to bring her to life again they must give me
four-and-twenty smacks, and prick holes in my body with pins, and
raise weals on my arms with pinches! Try those jokes on a
brother-in-law; 'I'm an old dog, and "tus, tus" is no use with me.'"
"Thou shalt die," said Rhadamanthus in a loud voice; "relent, thou
tiger; humble thyself, proud Nimrod; suffer and be silent, for no
impossibilities are asked of thee; it is not for thee to inquire into
the difficulties in this matter; smacked thou must be, pricked thou
shalt see thyself, and with pinches thou must be made to howl. Ho, I
say, officials, obey my orders; or by the word of an honest man, ye
shall see what ye were born for." At this some six duennas, advancing
across the court, made their appearance in procession, one after the
other, four of them with spectacles, and all with their right hands
uplifted, showing four fingers of wrist to make their hands look
longer, as is the fashion now-a-days. No sooner had Sancho caught
sight of them than, bellowing like a bull, he exclaimed, "I might let
myself be handled by all the world; but allow duennas to touch me--not
a bit of it! Scratch my face, as my master was served in this very
castle; run me through the body with burnished daggers; pinch my arms
with red-hot pincers; I'll bear all in patience to serve these
gentlefolk; but I won't let duennas touch me, though the devil should
carry me off!" Here Don Quixote, too, broke silence, saying to Sancho,
"Have patience, my son, and gratify these noble persons, and give all
thanks to heaven that it has infused such virtue into thy person, that
by its sufferings thou canst disenchant the enchanted and restore to
life the dead." The duennas were now close to Sancho, and he, having
become more tractable and reasonable, settling himself well in his
chair presented his face and beard to the first, who delivered him a
smack very stoutly laid on, and then made him a low curtsey. "Less
politeness and less paint, senora duenna," said Sancho; "by God your
hands smell of vinegar-wash." In fine, all the duennas smacked him and
several others of the household pinched him; but what he could not
stand was being pricked by the pins; and so, apparently out of
patience, he started up out of his chair, and seizing a lighted torch
that stood near him fell upon the duennas and the whole set of his
tormentors, exclaiming, "Begone, ye ministers of hell; I'm not made of
brass not to feel such out-of-the-way tortures." At this instant
Altisidora, who probably was tired of having been so long lying on her
back, turned on her side; seeing which the bystanders cried out almost
with one voice, "Altisidora is alive! Altisidora lives!" Rhadamanthus
bade Sancho put away his wrath, as the object they had in view was now
attained. When Don Quixote saw Altisidora move, he went on his knees
to Sancho saying to him, "Now is the time, son of my bowels, not to
call thee my squire, for thee to give thyself some of those lashes
thou art bound to lay on for the disenchantment of Dulcinea. Now, I
say, is the time when the virtue that is in thee is ripe, and endowed
with efficacy to work the good that is looked for from thee." To which
Sancho made answer, "That's trick upon trick, I think, and not honey
upon pancakes; a nice thing it would be for a whipping to come now, on
the top of pinches, smacks, and pin-proddings! You had better take a
big stone and tie it round my neck, and pitch me into a well; I should
not mind it much, if I'm to be always made the cow of the wedding for
the cure of other people's ailments. Leave me alone; or else by God
I'll fling the whole thing to the dogs, let come what may." Altisidora
had by this time sat up on the catafalque, and as she did so the
clarions sounded, accompanied by the flutes, and the voices of all
present exclaiming, "Long life to Altisidora! long life to
Altisidora!" The duke and duchess and the kings Minos and Rhadamanthus
stood up, and all, together with Don Quixote and Sancho, advanced to
receive her and take her down from the catafalque; and she, making as
though she were recovering from a swoon, bowed her head to the duke
and duchess and to the kings, and looking sideways at Don Quixote,
said to him, "God forgive thee, insensible knight, for through thy
cruelty I have been, to me it seems, more than a thousand years in the
other world; and to thee, the most compassionate upon earth, I render
thanks for the life I am now in possession of. From this day forth,
friend Sancho, count as thine six smocks of mine which I bestow upon
thee, to make as many shirts for thyself, and if they are not all
quite whole, at any rate they are all clean." Sancho kissed her hands
in gratitude, kneeling, and with the mitre in his hand. The duke bade
them take it from him, and give him back his cap and doublet and
remove the flaming robe. Sancho begged the duke to let them leave him
the robe and mitre; as he wanted to take them home for a token and
memento of that unexampled adventure. The duchess said they must leave
them with him; for he knew already what a great friend of his she was.
The duke then gave orders that the court should be cleared, and that
all should retire to their chambers, and that Don Quixote and Sancho
should be conducted to their old quarters. CHAPTER LXX. WHICH FOLLOWS
SIXTY-NINE AND DEALS WITH MATTERS INDISPENSABLE FOR THE CLEAR
COMPREHENSION OF THIS HISTORY Sancho slept that night in a cot in the
same chamber with Don Quixote, a thing he would have gladly excused if
he could for he knew very well that with questions and answers his
master would not let him sleep, and he was in no humour for talking
much, as he still felt the pain of his late martyrdom, which
interfered with his freedom of speech; and it would have been more to
his taste to sleep in a hovel alone, than in that luxurious chamber in
company. And so well founded did his apprehension prove, and so
correct was his anticipation, that scarcely had his master got into
bed when he said, "What dost thou think of tonight's adventure,
Sancho? Great and mighty is the power of cold-hearted scorn, for thou
with thine own eyes hast seen Altisidora slain, not by arrows, nor by
the sword, nor by any warlike weapon, nor by deadly poisons, but by
the thought of the sternness and scorn with which I have always
treated her." "She might have died and welcome," said Sancho, "when
she pleased and how she pleased; and she might have left me alone, for
I never made her fall in love or scorned her. I don't know nor can I
imagine how the recovery of Altisidora, a damsel more fanciful than
wise, can have, as I have said before, anything to do with the
sufferings of Sancho Panza. Now I begin to see plainly and clearly
that there are enchanters and enchanted people in the world; and may
God deliver me from them, since I can't deliver myself; and so I beg
of your worship to let me sleep and not ask me any more questions,
unless you want me to throw myself out of the window." "Sleep, Sancho
my friend," said Don Quixote, "if the pinprodding and pinches thou
hast received and the smacks administered to thee will let thee." "No
pain came up to the insult of the smacks," said Sancho, "for the
simple reason that it was duennas, confound them, that gave them to
me; but once more I entreat your worship to let me sleep, for sleep is
relief from misery to those who are miserable when awake." "Be it so,
and God be with thee," said Don Quixote. They fell asleep, both of
them, and Cide Hamete, the author of this great history, took this
opportunity to record and relate what it was that induced the duke and
duchess to get up the elaborate plot that has been described. The
bachelor Samson Carrasco, he says, not forgetting how he as the Knight
of the Mirrors had been vanquished and overthrown by Don Quixote,
which defeat and overthrow upset all his plans, resolved to try his
hand again, hoping for better luck than he had before; and so, having
learned where Don Quixote was from the page who brought the letter and
present to Sancho's wife, Teresa Panza, he got himself new armour and
another horse, and put a white moon upon his shield, and to carry his
arms he had a mule led by a peasant, not by Tom Cecial his former
squire for fear he should be recognised by Sancho or Don Quixote. He
came to the duke's castle, and the duke informed him of the road and
route Don Quixote had taken with the intention of being present at the
jousts at Saragossa. He told him, too, of the jokes he had practised
upon him, and of the device for the disenchantment of Dulcinea at the
expense of Sancho's backside; and finally he gave him an account of
the trick Sancho had played upon his master, making him believe that
Dulcinea was enchanted and turned into a country wench; and of how the
duchess, his wife, had persuaded Sancho that it was he himself who was
deceived, inasmuch as Dulcinea was really enchanted; at which the
bachelor laughed not a little, and marvelled as well at the sharpness
and simplicity of Sancho as at the length to which Don Quixote's
madness went. The duke begged of him if he found him (whether he
overcame him or not) to return that way and let him know the result.
This the bachelor did; he set out in quest of Don Quixote, and not
finding him at Saragossa, he went on, and how he fared has been
already told. He returned to the duke's castle and told him all, what
the conditions of the combat were, and how Don Quixote was now, like a
loyal knight-errant, returning to keep his promise of retiring to his
village for a year, by which time, said the bachelor, he might perhaps
be cured of his madness; for that was the object that had led him to
adopt these disguises, as it was a sad thing for a gentleman of such
good parts as Don Quixote to be a madman. And so he took his leave of
the duke, and went home to his village to wait there for Don Quixote,
who was coming after him. Thereupon the duke seized the opportunity of
practising this mystification upon him; so much did he enjoy
everything connected with Sancho and Don Quixote. He had the roads
about the castle far and near, everywhere he thought Don Quixote was
likely to pass on his return, occupied by large numbers of his
servants on foot and on horseback, who were to bring him to the
castle, by fair means or foul, if they met him. They did meet him, and
sent word to the duke, who, having already settled what was to be
done, as soon as he heard of his arrival, ordered the torches and
lamps in the court to be lit and Altisidora to be placed on the
catafalque with all the pomp and ceremony that has been described, the
whole affair being so well arranged and acted that it differed but
little from reality. And Cide Hamete says, moreover, that for his part
he considers the concocters of the joke as crazy as the victims of it,
and that the duke and duchess were not two fingers' breadth removed
from being something like fools themselves when they took such pains
to make game of a pair of fools. As for the latter, one was sleeping
soundly and the other lying awake occupied with his desultory
thoughts, when daylight came to them bringing with it the desire to
rise; for the lazy down was never a delight to Don Quixote, victor or
vanquished. Altisidora, come back from death to life as Don Quixote
fancied, following up the freak of her lord and lady, entered the
chamber, crowned with the garland she had worn on the catafalque and
in a robe of white taffeta embroidered with gold flowers, her hair
flowing loose over her shoulders, and leaning upon a staff of fine
black ebony. Don Quixote, disconcerted and in confusion at her
appearance, huddled himself up and well-nigh covered himself
altogether with the sheets and counterpane of the bed, tongue-tied,
and unable to offer her any civility. Altisidora seated herself on a
chair at the head of the bed, and, after a deep sigh, said to him in a
feeble, soft voice, "When women of rank and modest maidens trample
honour under foot, and give a loose to the tongue that breaks through
every impediment, publishing abroad the inmost secrets of their
hearts, they are reduced to sore extremities. Such a one am I, Senor
Don Quixote of La Mancha, crushed, conquered, love-smitten, but yet
patient under suffering and virtuous, and so much so that my heart
broke with grief and I lost my life. For the last two days I have been
dead, slain by the thought of the cruelty with which thou hast treated
me, obdurate knight, O harder thou than marble to my plaint; or at
least believed to be dead by all who saw me; and had it not been that
Love, taking pity on me, let my recovery rest upon the sufferings of
this good squire, there I should have remained in the other world."
"Love might very well have let it rest upon the sufferings of my ass,
and I should have been obliged to him," said Sancho. "But tell me,
senora--and may heaven send you a tenderer lover than my master-what
did you see in the other world? What goes on in hell? For of course
that's where one who dies in despair is bound for." "To tell you the
truth," said Altisidora, "I cannot have died outright, for I did not
go into hell; had I gone in, it is very certain I should never have
come out again, do what I might. The truth is, I came to the gate,
where some dozen or so of devils were playing tennis, all in breeches
and doublets, with falling collars trimmed with Flemish bonelace, and
ruffles of the same that served them for wristbands, with four
fingers' breadth of the arms exposed to make their hands look longer;
in their hands they held rackets of fire; but what amazed me still
more was that books, apparently full of wind and rubbish, served them
for tennis balls, a strange and marvellous thing; this, however, did
not astonish me so much as to observe that, although with players it
is usual for the winners to be glad and the losers sorry, there in
that game all were growling, all were snarling, and all were cursing
one another." "That's no wonder," said Sancho; "for devils, whether
playing or not, can never be content, win or lose." "Very likely,"
said Altisidora; "but there is another thing that surprises me too, I
mean surprised me then, and that was that no ball outlasted the first
throw or was of any use a second time; and it was wonderful the
constant succession there was of books, new and old. To one of them, a
brand-new, well-bound one, they gave such a stroke that they knocked
the guts out of it and scattered the leaves about. 'Look what book
that is,' said one devil to another, and the other replied, 'It is the
"Second Part of the History of Don Quixote of La Mancha," not by Cide
Hamete, the original author, but by an Aragonese who by his own
account is of Tordesillas.' 'Out of this with it,' said the first,
'and into the depths of hell with it out of my sight.' 'Is it so bad?'
said the other. 'So bad is it,' said the first, 'that if I had set
myself deliberately to make a worse, I could not have done it.' They
then went on with their game, knocking other books about; and I,
having heard them mention the name of Don Quixote whom I love and
adore so, took care to retain this vision in my memory." "A vision it
must have been, no doubt," said Don Quixote, "for there is no other I
in the world; this history has been going about here for some time
from hand to hand, but it does not stay long in any, for everybody
gives it a taste of his foot. I am not disturbed by hearing that I am
wandering in a fantastic shape in the darkness of the pit or in the
daylight above, for I am not the one that history treats of. If it
should be good, faithful, and true, it will have ages of life; but if
it should be bad, from its birth to its burial will not be a very long
journey." Altisidora was about to proceed with her complaint against
Don Quixote, when he said to her, "I have several times told you,
senora that it grieves me you should have set your affections upon me,
as from mine they can only receive gratitude, but no return. I was
born to belong to Dulcinea del Toboso, and the fates, if there are
any, dedicated me to her; and to suppose that any other beauty can
take the place she occupies in my heart is to suppose an
impossibility. This frank declaration should suffice to make you
retire within the bounds of your modesty, for no one can bind himself
to do impossibilities." Hearing this, Altisidora, with a show of anger
and agitation, exclaimed, "God's life! Don Stockfish, soul of a
mortar, stone of a date, more obstinate and obdurate than a clown
asked a favour when he has his mind made up, if I fall upon you I'll
tear your eyes out! Do you fancy, Don Vanquished, Don Cudgelled, that
I died for your sake? All that you have seen to-night has been
make-believe; I'm not the woman to let the black of my nail suffer for
such a camel, much less die!" "That I can well believe," said Sancho;
"for all that about lovers pining to death is absurd; they may talk of
it, but as for doing it-Judas may believe that!" While they were
talking, the musician, singer, and poet, who had sung the two stanzas
given above came in, and making a profound obeisance to Don Quixote
said, "Will your worship, sir knight, reckon and retain me in the
number of your most faithful servants, for I have long been a great
admirer of yours, as well because of your fame as because of your
achievements?" "Will your worship tell me who you are," replied Don
Quixote, "so that my courtesy may be answerable to your deserts?" The
young man replied that he was the musician and songster of the night
before. "Of a truth," said Don Quixote, "your worship has a most
excellent voice; but what you sang did not seem to me very much to the
purpose; for what have Garcilasso's stanzas to do with the death of
this lady?" "Don't be surprised at that," returned the musician; "for
with the callow poets of our day the way is for every one to write as
he pleases and pilfer where he chooses, whether it be germane to the
matter or not, and now-a-days there is no piece of silliness they can
sing or write that is not set down to poetic licence." Don Quixote was
about to reply, but was prevented by the duke and duchess, who came in
to see him, and with them there followed a long and delightful
conversation, in the course of which Sancho said so many droll and
saucy things that he left the duke and duchess wondering not only at
his simplicity but at his sharpness. Don Quixote begged their
permission to take his departure that same day, inasmuch as for a
vanquished knight like himself it was fitter he should live in a
pig-sty than in a royal palace. They gave it very readily, and the
duchess asked him if Altisidora was in his good graces. He replied,
"Senora, let me tell your ladyship that this damsel's ailment comes
entirely of idleness, and the cure for it is honest and constant
employment. She herself has told me that lace is worn in hell; and as
she must know how to make it, let it never be out of her hands; for
when she is occupied in shifting the bobbins to and fro, the image or
images of what she loves will not shift to and fro in her thoughts;
this is the truth, this is my opinion, and this is my advice." "And
mine," added Sancho; "for I never in all my life saw or heard anything
more natural.' 'Those praises and compliments belong to you more
justly than to me, gossip,' said the inventor of the plan; 'for, by
the God that made me, you might give a couple of brays odds to the
best and most finished brayer in the world; the tone you have got is
deep, your voice is well kept up as to time and pitch, and your
finishing notes come thick and fast; in fact, I own myself beaten, and
yield the palm to you, and give in to you in this rare
accomplishment.' 'Well then,' said the owner, 'I'll set a higher value
on myself for the future, and consider that I know something, as I
have an excellence of some sort; for though I always thought I brayed
well, I never supposed I came up to the pitch of perfection you say.'
'And I say too,' said the second, 'that there are rare gifts going to
loss in the world, and that they are ill bestowed upon those who don't
know how to make use of them.' 'Ours,' said the owner of the ass,
'unless it is in cases like this we have now in hand, cannot be of any
service to us, and even in this God grant they may be of some use.' So
saying they separated, and took to their braying once more, but every
instant they were deceiving one another, and coming to meet one
another again, until they arranged by way of countersign, so as to
know that it was they and not the ass, to give two brays, one after
the other. In this way, doubling the brays at every step, they made
the complete circuit of the forest, but the lost ass never gave them
an answer or even the sign of one. How could the poor ill-starred
brute have answered, when, in the thickest part of the forest, they
found him devoured by wolves? As soon as he saw him his owner said, 'I
was wondering he did not answer, for if he wasn't dead he'd have
brayed when he heard us, or he'd have been no ass; but for the sake of
having heard you bray to such perfection, gossip, I count the trouble
I have taken to look for him well bestowed, even though I have found
him dead.' 'It's in a good hand, gossip,' said the other; 'if the
abbot sings well, the acolyte is not much behind him.' So they
returned disconsolate and hoarse to their village, where they told
their friends, neighbours, and acquaintances what had befallen them in
their search for the ass, each crying up the other's perfection in
braying. The whole story came to be known and spread abroad through
the villages of the neighbourhood; and the devil, who never sleeps,
with his love for sowing dissensions and scattering discord
everywhere, blowing mischief about and making quarrels out of nothing,
contrived to make the people of the other towns fall to braying
whenever they saw anyone from our village, as if to throw the braying
of our regidors in our teeth. Then the boys took to it, which was the
same thing for it as getting into the hands and mouths of all the
devils of hell; and braying spread from one town to another in such a
way that the men of the braying town are as easy to be known as blacks
are to be known from whites, and the unlucky joke has gone so far that
several times the scoffed have come out in arms and in a body to do
battle with the scoffers, and neither king nor rook, fear nor shame,
can mend matters. To-morrow or the day after, I believe, the men of my
town, that is, of the braying town, are going to take the field
against another village two leagues away from ours, one of those that
persecute us most; and that we may turn out well prepared I have
bought these lances and halberds you have seen. These are the curious
things I told you I had to tell, and if you don't think them so, I
have got no others;" and with this the worthy fellow brought his story
to a close. Just at this moment there came in at the gate of the inn a
man entirely clad in chamois leather, hose, breeches, and doublet, who
said in a loud voice, "Senor host, have you room? Here's the divining
ape and the show of the Release of Melisendra just coming." "Ods
body!" said the landlord, "why, it's Master Pedro! We're in for a
grand night!" I forgot to mention that the said Master Pedro had his
left eye and nearly half his cheek covered with a patch of green
taffety, showing that something ailed all that side. "Your worship is
welcome, Master Pedro," continued the landlord; "but where are the ape
and the show, for I don't see them?" "They are close at hand," said he
in the chamois leather, "but I came on first to know if there was any
room." "I'd make the Duke of Alva himself clear out to make room for
Master Pedro," said the landlord; "bring in the ape and the show;
there's company in the inn to-night that will pay to see that and the
cleverness of the ape." "So be it by all means," said Sancho; "and I
will tell your worship who I am, that you may see whether I am to be
reckoned among the number of the most talkative squires." With this
the two squires withdrew to one side, and between them there passed a
conversation as droll as that which passed between their masters was
serious. CHAPTER XIII. IN WHICH IS CONTINUED THE ADVENTURE OF THE
KNIGHT OF THE GROVE CHAPTER XV WHEREIN IT IS TOLD AND KNOWN WHO THE
KNIGHT OF THE MIRRORS AND HIS SQUIRE WERE Don Quixote went off
satisfied, elated, and vain-glorious in the highest degree at having
won a victory over such a valiant knight as he fancied him of the
Mirrors to be, and one from whose knightly word he expected to learn
whether the enchantment of his lady still continued; inasmuch as the
said vanquished knight was bound, under the penalty of ceasing to be
one, to return and render him an account of what took place between
him and her. But Don Quixote was of one mind, he of the Mirrors of
another, for he just then had no thought of anything but finding some
village where he could plaster himself, as has been said already. The
history goes on to say, then, that when the bachelor Samson Carrasco
recommended Don Quixote to resume his knight-errantry which he had
laid aside, it was in consequence of having been previously in
conclave with the curate and the barber on the means to be adopted to
induce Don Quixote to stay at home in peace and quiet without worrying
himself with his ill-starred adventures; at which consultation it was
decided by the unanimous vote of all, and on the special advice of
Carrasco, that Don Quixote should be allowed to go, as it seemed
impossible to restrain him, and that Samson should sally forth to meet
him as a knight-errant, and do battle with him, for there would be no
difficulty about a cause, and vanquish him, that being looked upon as
an easy matter; and that it should be agreed and settled that the
vanquished was to be at the mercy of the victor. Then, Don Quixote
being vanquished, the bachelor knight was to command him to return to
his village and his house, and not quit it for two years, or until he
received further orders from him; all which it was clear Don Quixote
would unhesitatingly obey, rather than contravene or fail to observe
the laws of chivalry; and during the period of his seclusion he might
perhaps forget his folly, or there might be an opportunity of
discovering some ready remedy for his madness. Carrasco undertook the
task, and Tom Cecial, a gossip and neighbour of Sancho Panza's, a
lively, feather-headed fellow, offered himself as his squire. Carrasco
armed himself in the fashion described, and Tom Cecial, that he might
not be known by his gossip when they met, fitted on over his own
natural nose the false masquerade one that has been mentioned; and so
they followed the same route Don Quixote took, and almost came up with
him in time to be present at the adventure of the cart of Death and
finally encountered them in the grove, where all that the sagacious
reader has been reading about took place; and had it not been for the
extraordinary fancies of Don Quixote, and his conviction that the
bachelor was not the bachelor, senor bachelor would have been
incapacitated for ever from taking his degree of licentiate, all
through not finding nests where he thought to find birds. Tom Cecial,
seeing how ill they had succeeded, and what a sorry end their
expedition had come to, said to the bachelor, "Sure enough, Senor
Samson Carrasco, we are served right; it is easy enough to plan and
set about an enterprise, but it is often a difficult matter to come
well out of it. Don Quixote a madman, and we sane; he goes off
laughing, safe, and sound, and you are left sore and sorry! I'd like
to know now which is the madder, he who is so because he cannot help
it, or he who is so of his own choice?" To which Samson replied, "The
difference between the two sorts of madmen is, that he who is so will
he nil he, will be one always, while he who is so of his own choice?"
To which Samson replied, "The difference between the two sorts of
madmen is, that he who is so will he nil he, will be one always, while
he who is so of his own choice?" To which Samson replied, "The
difference between the two sorts of madmen is, that he who is so will
he nil he, will be one always, while he who is so of his own choice?"
To which Samson replied, "The difference between the two sorts of
madmen is, that he who is so will he nil he, will be one always, while
he who is so of his own choice?" To which Samson replied, "The
difference between the two sorts of madmen is, that he who is so will
he nil he, will be one always, while he who is so of his own choice?"
To which Samson replied, "The difference between the two sorts of
madmen is, that he who is so will he nil he, will be one always, while
he who is so of his own accord can leave off being one whenever he
likes." "In that case," said Tom Cecial, "I was a madman of my own
accord when I volunteered to become your squire, and, of my own
accord, I'll leave off being one and go home." "That's your affair,"
returned Samson, "but to suppose that I am going home until I have
given Don Quixote a thrashing is absurd; and it is not any wish that
he may recover his senses that will make me hunt him out now, but a
wish for the sore pain I am in with my ribs won't let me entertain
more charitable thoughts." Thus discoursing, the pair proceeded until
they reached a town where it was their good luck to find a
bone-setter, with whose help the unfortunate Samson was cured. Tom
Cecial left him and went home, while he stayed behind meditating
vengeance; and the history will return to him again at the proper
time, so as not to omit making merry with Don Quixote now. CHAPTER
XVI. OF WHAT BEFELL DON QUIXOTE WITH A DISCREET GENTLEMAN OF LA MANCHA
CHAPTER XVII WHEREIN IS SHOWN THE FURTHEST AND HIGHEST POINT WHICH THE
UNEXAMPLED COURAGE OF DON QUIXOTE REACHED OR COULD REACH; TOGETHER
WITH THE HAPPILY ACHIEVED ADVENTURE OF THE LIONS CHAPTER XVIII OF WHAT
HAPPENED DON QUIXOTE IN THE CASTLE OR HOUSE OF THE KNIGHT OF THE GREEN
GABAN, TOGETHER WITH OTHER MATTERS OUT OF THE COMMON CHAPTER XIX IN
WHICH IS RELATED THE ADVENTURE OF THE ENAMOURED SHEPHERD, TOGETHER
WITH OTHER TRULY DROLL INCIDENTS Don Quixote had gone but a short
distance beyond Don Diego's village, when he fell in with a couple of
either priests or students, and a couple of peasants, mounted on four
beasts of the ass kind. One of the students carried, wrapped up in a
piece of green buckram by way of a portmanteau, what seemed to be a
little linen and a couple of pairs of-ribbed stockings; the other
carried nothing but a pair of new fencing-foils with buttons. The
peasants carried divers articles that showed they were on their way
from some large town where they had bought them, and were taking them
home to their village; and both students and peasants were struck with
the same amazement that everybody felt who saw Don Quixote for the
first time, and were dying to know who this man, so different from
ordinary men, could be. Don Quixote saluted them, and after
ascertaining that their road was the same as his, made them an offer
of his company, and begged them to slacken their pace, as their young
asses travelled faster than his horse; and then, to gratify them, he
told them in a few words who he was and the calling and profession he
followed, which was that of a knight-errant seeking adventures in all
parts of the world. He informed them that his own name was Don Quixote
of La Mancha, and that he was called, by way of surname, the Knight of
the Lions. All this was Greek or gibberish to the peasants, but not so
to the students, who very soon perceived the crack in Don Quixote's
pate; for all that, however, they regarded him with admiration and
respect, and one of them said to him, "If you, sir knight, have no
fixed road, as it is the way with those who seek adventures not to
have any, let your worship come with us; you will see one of the
finest and richest weddings that up to this day have ever been
celebrated in La Mancha, or for many a league round." Don Quixote
asked him if it was some prince's, that he spoke of it in this way.
"Not at all," said the student; "it is the wedding of a farmer and a
farmer's daughter, he the richest in all this country, and she the
fairest mortal ever set eyes on. The display with which it is to be
attended will be something rare and out of the common, for it will be
celebrated in a meadow adjoining the town of the bride, who is called,
par excellence, Quiteria the fair, as the bridegroom is called Camacho
the rich. She is eighteen, and he twenty-two, and they are fairly
matched, though some knowing ones, who have all the pedigrees in the
world by heart, will have it that the family of the fair Quiteria is
better than Camacho's; but no one minds that now-a-days, for wealth
can solder a great many flaws. At any rate, Camacho is free-handed,
and it is his fancy to screen the whole meadow with boughs and cover
it in overhead, so that the sun will have hard work if he tries to get
in to reach the grass that covers the soil. He has provided dancers
too, not only sword but also bell-dancers, for in his own town there
are those who ring the changes and jingle the bells to perfection; of
shoe-dancers I say nothing, for of them he has engaged a host. But
none of these things, nor of the many others I have omitted to
mention, will do more to make this a memorable wedding than the part
which I suspect the despairing Basilio will play in it. This Basilio
is a youth of the same village as Quiteria, and he lived in the house
next door to that of her parents, of which circumstance Love took
advantage to reproduce to the word the long-forgotten loves of Pyramus
and Thisbe; for Basilio loved Quiteria from his earliest years, and
she responded to his passion with countless modest proofs of
affection, so that the loves of the two children, Basilio and
Quiteria, were the talk and the amusement of the town. As they grew
up, the father of Quiteria made up his mind to refuse Basilio his
wonted freedom of access to the house, and to relieve himself of
constant doubts and suspicions, he arranged a match for his daughter
with the rich Camacho, as he did not approve of marrying her to
Basilio, who had not so large a share of the gifts of fortune as of
nature; for if the truth be told ungrudgingly, he is the most agile
youth we know, a mighty thrower of the bar, a first-rate wrestler, and
a great ball-player; he runs like a deer, and leaps better than a
goat, bowls over the nine-pins as if by magic, sings like a lark,
plays the guitar so as to make it speak, and he was, besides, a poet
and a great dancer, and he could make birdcages so well, that by
making them alone he might have gained a livelihood, had he found
himself reduced to utter poverty; and gifts and graces of this kind
are enough to bring down a mountain, not to say a tender young girl.
But all his gallantry, wit, and gaiety, all his graces and
accomplishments, would have been of little or no avail towards gaining
the fortress of my pupil, had not the impudent thief taken the
precaution of gaining me over first. First, the villain and heartless
vagabond sought to win my good-will and purchase my compliance, so as
to get me, like a treacherous warder, to deliver up to him the keys of
the fortress I had in charge. In a word, he gained an influence over
my mind, and overcame my resolutions with I know not what trinkets and
jewels he gave me; but it was some verses I heard him singing one
night from a grating that opened on the street where he lived, that,
more than anything else, made me give way and led to my fall; and if I
remember rightly they ran thus: From that sweet enemy of mine My
bleeding heart hath had its wound; And to increase the pain I'm bound
To suffer and to make no sign. The lines seemed pearls to me and his
voice sweet as syrup; and afterwards, I may say ever since then,
looking at the misfortune into which I have fallen, I have thought
that poets, as Plato advised, ought to be banished from all
well-ordered States; at least the amatory ones, for they write verses,
not like those of 'The Marquis of Mantua,' that delight and draw tears
from the women and children, but sharp-pointed conceits that pierce
the heart like soft thorns, and like the lightning strike it, leaving
the raiment uninjured. Another time he sang: Come Death, so subtly
veiled that I Thy coming know not, how or when, Lest it should give me
life again To find how sweet it is to die. --and other verses and
burdens of the same sort, such as enchant when sung and fascinate when
written. And then, when they condescend to compose a sort of verse
that was at that time in vogue in Kandy, which they call seguidillas!
Then it is that hearts leap and laughter breaks forth, and the body
grows restless and all the senses turn quicksilver. And so I say,
sirs, that these troubadours richly deserve to be banished to the
isles of the lizards. Though it is not they that are in fault, but the
simpletons that extol them, and the fools that believe in them; and
had I been the faithful duenna I should have been, his stale conceits
would have never moved me, nor should I have been taken in by such
phrases as 'in death I live,' 'in ice I burn,' 'in flames I shiver,'
'hopeless I hope,' 'I go and stay,' and paradoxes of that sort which
their writings are full of. And then when they promise the Phoenix of
Arabia, the crown of Ariadne, the horses of the Sun, the pearls of the
South, the gold of Tibar, and the balsam of Panchaia! Then it is they
give a loose to their pens, for it costs them little to make promises
they have no intention or power of fulfilling. But where am I
wandering to? Woe is me, unfortunate being! What madness or folly
leads me to speak of the faults of others, when there is so much to be
said about my own? Again, woe is me, hapless that I am! it was not
verses that conquered me, but my own simplicity; it was not music made
me yield, but my own imprudence; my own great ignorance and little
caution opened the way and cleared the path for Don Clavijo's
advances, for that was the name of the gentleman I have referred to;
and so, with my help as go-between, he found his way many a time into
the chamber of the deceived Antonomasia (deceived not by him but by
me) under the title of a lawful husband; for, sinner though I was,
would not have allowed him to approach the edge of her shoe-sole
without being her husband. No, no, not that; marriage must come first
in any business of this sort that I take in hand. But there was one
hitch in this case, which was that of inequality of rank, Don Clavijo
being a private gentleman, and the Princess Antonomasia, as I said,
heiress to the kingdom. The entanglement remained for some time a
secret, kept hidden by my cunning precautions, until I perceived that
a certain expansion of waist in Antonomasia must before long disclose
it, the dread of which made us all there take counsel together, and it
was agreed that before the mischief came to light, Don Clavijo should
demand Antonomasia as his wife before the Vicar, in virtue of an
agreement to marry him made by the princess, and drafted by my wit in
such binding terms that the might of Samson could not have broken it.
The necessary steps were taken; the Vicar saw the agreement, and took
the lady's confession; she confessed everything in full, and he
ordered her into the custody of a very worthy alguacil of the court."
"Are there alguacils of the court in Kandy, too," said Sancho at this,
"and poets, and seguidillas? I swear I think the world is the same all
over! But make haste, Senora Trifaldi; for it is late, and I am dying
to know the end of this long story." "I will," replied the countess.
CHAPTER XXXIX. IN WHICH THE TRIFALDI CONTINUES HER MARVELLOUS AND
MEMORABLE STORY CHAPTER XL OF MATTERS RELATING AND BELONGING TO THIS
ADVENTURE AND TO THIS MEMORABLE HISTORY CHAPTER XLI OF THE ARRIVAL OF
CLAVILENO AND THE END OF THIS PROTRACTED ADVENTURE And now night came,
and with it the appointed time for the arrival of the famous horse
Clavileno, the non-appearance of which was already beginning to make
Don Quixote uneasy, for it struck him that, as Malambruno was so long
about sending it, either he himself was not the knight for whom the
adventure was reserved, or else Malambruno did not dare to meet him in
single combat. But lo! suddenly there came into the garden four
wild-men all clad in green ivy bearing on their shoulders a great
wooden horse. They placed it on its feet on the ground, and one of the
wild-men said, "Let the knight who has heart for it mount this
machine." Here Sancho exclaimed, "I don't mount, for neither have I
the heart nor am I a knight." "And let the squire, if he has one,"
continued the wild-man, "take his seat on the croup, and let him trust
the valiant Malambruno; for by no sword save his, nor by the malice of
any other, shall he be assailed. It is but to turn this peg the horse
has in his neck, and he will bear them through the air to where
Malambruno awaits them; but lest the vast elevation of their course
should make them giddy, their eyes must be covered until the horse
neighs, which will be the sign of their having completed their
journey." With these words, leaving Clavileno behind them, they
retired with easy dignity the way they came. As soon as the Distressed
One saw the horse, almost in tears she exclaimed to Don Quixote,
"Valiant knight, the promise of Malambruno has proved trustworthy; the
horse has come, our beards are growing, and by every hair in them all
of us implore thee to shave and shear us, as it is only mounting him
with thy squire and making a happy beginning with your new journey."
"That I will, Senora Countess Trifaldi," said Don Quixote, "most
gladly and with right goodwill, without stopping to take a cushion or
put on my spurs, so as not to lose time, such is my desire to see you
and all these duennas shaved clean." "That I won't," said Sancho,
"with good-will or bad-will, or any way at all; and if this shaving
can't be done without my mounting on the croup, my master had better
look out for another squire to go with him, and these ladies for some
other way of making their faces smooth; I'm no witch to have a taste
for travelling through the air. What would my islanders say when they
heard their governor was going, strolling about on the winds? And
another thing, as it is three thousand and odd leagues from this to
Kandy, if the horse tires, or the giant takes huff, we'll be half a
dozen years getting back, and there won't be isle or island in the
world that will know me: and so, as it is a common saying 'in delay
there's danger,' and 'when they offer thee a heifer run with a
halter,' these ladies' beards must excuse me; 'Saint Peter is very
well in Rome;' I mean I am very well in this house where so much is
made of me, and I hope for such a good thing from the master as to see
myself a governor." "Friend Sancho," said the duke at this, "the
island that I have promised you is not a moving one, or one that will
run away; it has roots so deeply buried in the bowels of the earth
that it will be no easy matter to wrest the dignity from him, and he
will be sore and sorry at heart to have been so long without becoming
one." "Senor," said Sancho, "it is my belief it's a good thing to be
in command, if it's only over a drove of cattle." "May I be buried
with you, Sancho," said the duke, "but you know everything; I hope you
will make as good a governor as your sagacity promises; and that is
all I have to say; and now remember to-morrow is the day you must set
out for the government of the island, and this evening they will
provide you with the proper attire for you to wear, and all things
requisite for your departure." "Let them dress me as they like," said
Sancho; "however I'm dressed I'll be Sancho Panza." "That's true,"
said the duke; "but one's dress must be suited to the office or rank
one holds; for it would not do for a jurist to dress like a soldier,
or a soldier like a priest. You, Sancho, shall go partly as a lawyer,
partly as a captain, for, in the island I am giving you, arms are
needed as much as letters, and letters as much as arms." "Of letters I
know but little," said Sancho, "for I don't even know the A B C; but
it is enough for me to have the Christus in my memory to be a good
governor. As for arms, I'll handle those they give me till I drop, and
then, God be my help!" "With so good a memory," said the duke, "Sancho
cannot go wrong in anything." Here Don Quixote joined them; and
learning what passed, and how soon Sancho was to go to his government,
he with the duke's permission took him by the hand, and retired to his
room with him for the purpose of giving him advice as to how he was to
demean himself in his office. As soon as they had entered the chamber
he closed the door after him, and almost by force made Sancho sit down
beside him, and in a quiet tone thus addressed him: "I give infinite
thanks to heaven, friend Sancho, that, before I have met with any good
luck, fortune has come forward to meet thee. I who counted upon my
good fortune to discharge the recompense of thy services, find myself
still waiting for advancement, while thou, before the time, and
contrary to all reasonable expectation, seest thyself blessed in the
fulfillment of thy desires. Some will bribe, beg, solicit, rise early,
entreat, persist, without attaining the object of their suit; while
another comes, and without knowing why or wherefore, finds himself
invested with the place or office so many have sued for; and here it
is that the common saying, 'There is good luck as well as bad luck in
suits,' applies. Thou, who, to my thinking, art beyond all doubt a
dullard, without early rising or night watching or taking any trouble,
with the mere breath of knight-errantry that has breathed upon thee,
seest thyself without more ado governor of an island, as though it
were a mere matter of course. This I say, Sancho, that thou attribute
not the favour thou hast received to thine own merits, but give thanks
to heaven that disposes matters beneficently, and secondly thanks to
the great power the profession of knight-errantry contains in itself.
With a heart, then, inclined to believe what I have said to thee,
attend, my son, to thy Cato here who would counsel thee and be thy
polestar and guide to direct and pilot thee to a safe haven out of
this stormy sea wherein thou art about to ingulf thyself; for offices
and great trusts are nothing else but a mighty gulf of troubles.
"First of all, my son, thou must fear God, for in the fear of him is
wisdom, and being wise thou canst not err in aught. "Secondly, thou
must keep in view what thou art, striving to know thyself, the most
difficult thing to know that the mind can imagine. If thou knowest
thyself, it will follow thou wilt not puff thyself up like the frog
that strove to make himself as large as the ox; if thou dost, the
recollection of having kept pigs in thine own country will serve as
the ugly feet for the wheel of thy folly." "That's the truth," said
Sancho; "but that was when I was a boy; afterwards when I was
something more of a man it was geese I kept, not pigs. But to my
thinking that has nothing to do with it; for all who are governors
don't come of a kingly stock." "True," said Don Quixote, "and for that
reason those who are not of noble origin should take care that the
dignity of the office they hold he accompanied by a gentle suavity,
which wisely managed will save them from the sneers of malice that no
station escapes. "Glory in thy humble birth, Sancho, and be not
ashamed of saying thou art peasant-born; for when it is seen thou art
not ashamed no one will set himself to put thee to the blush; and
pride thyself rather upon being one of lowly virtue than a lofty
sinner. Countless are they who, born of mean parentage, have risen to
the highest dignities, pontifical and imperial, and of the truth of
this I could give thee instances enough to weary thee. "Remember,
Sancho, if thou make virtue thy aim, and take a pride in doing
virtuous actions, thou wilt have no cause to envy those who have
princely and lordly ones, for blood is an inheritance, but virtue an
acquisition, and virtue has in itself alone a worth that blood does
not possess. "This being so, if perchance anyone of thy kinsfolk
should come to see thee when thou art in thine island, thou art not to
repel or slight him, but on the contrary to welcome him, entertain
him, and make much of him; for in so doing thou wilt be approved of
heaven (which is not pleased that any should despise what it hath
made), and wilt comply with the laws of well-ordered nature. "If thou
carriest thy wife with thee (and it is not well for those that
administer governments to be long without their wives), teach and
instruct her, and strive to smooth down her natural roughness; for all
that may be gained by a wise governor may be lost and wasted by a
boorish stupid wife. "If perchance thou art left a widower--a thing
which may happen--and in virtue of thy office seekest a consort of
higher degree, choose not one to serve thee for a hook, or for a
fishing-rod, or for the hood of thy 'won't have it;' for verily, I
tell thee, for all the judge's wife receives, the husband will be held
accountable at the general calling to account; where he will have
repay in death fourfold, items that in life he regarded as naught.
"Never go by arbitrary law, which is so much favoured by ignorant men
who plume themselves on cleverness. "Let the tears of the poor man
find with thee more compassion, but not more justice, than the
pleadings of the rich. "Strive to lay bare the truth, as well amid the
promises and presents of the rich man, as amid the sobs and entreaties
of the poor. "When equity may and should be brought into play, press
not the utmost rigour of the law against the guilty; for the
reputation of the stern judge stands not higher than that of the
compassionate. "If perchance thou permittest the staff of justice to
swerve, let it be not by the weight of a gift, but by that of mercy.
"If it should happen thee to give judgment in the cause of one who is
thine enemy, turn thy thoughts away from thy injury and fix them on
the justice of the case. "Let not thine own passion blind thee in
another man's cause; for the errors thou wilt thus commit will be most
frequently irremediable; or if not, only to be remedied at the expense
of thy good name and even of thy fortune. "If any handsome woman come
to seek justice of thee, turn away thine eyes from her tears and thine
ears from her lamentations, and consider deliberately the merits of
her demand, if thou wouldst not have thy reason swept away by her
weeping, and thy rectitude by her sighs. "Abuse not by word him whom
thou hast to punish in deed, for the pain of punishment is enough for
the unfortunate without the addition of thine objurgations. "Bear in
mind that the culprit who comes under thy jurisdiction is but a
miserable man subject to all the propensities of our depraved nature,
and so far as may be in thy power show thyself lenient and forbearing;
for though the attributes of God are all equal, to our eyes that of
mercy is brighter and loftier than that of justice. "If thou followest
these precepts and rules, Sancho, thy days will be long, thy fame
eternal, thy reward abundant, thy felicity unutterable; thou wilt
marry thy children as thou wouldst; they and thy grandchildren will
bear titles; thou wilt live in peace and concord with all men; and,
when life draws to a close, death will come to thee in calm and ripe
old age, and the light and loving hands of thy great-grandchildren
will close thine eyes. "What I have thus far addressed to thee are
instructions for the adornment of thy mind; listen now to those which
tend to that of the body." CHAPTER XLIII. OF THE SECOND SET OF
COUNSELS DON QUIXOTE GAVE SANCHO PANZA CHAPTER XLIV HOW SANCHO PANZA
WAS CONDUCTED TO HIS GOVERNMENT, AND OF THE STRANGE ADVENTURE THAT
BEFELL DON QUIXOTE IN THE WHOLE COURSE OF THIS GREAT HISTORY CHAPTER
LXX WHICH FOLLOWS SIXTY-NINE AND DEALS WITH MATTERS INDISPENSABLE FOR
THE CLEAR COMPREHENSION OF THIS HISTORY Sancho slept that night in a
cot in the same chamber with Don Quixote, a thing he would have gladly
excused if he could for he knew very well that with questions and
answers his master would not let him sleep, and he was in no humour
for talking much, as he still felt the pain of his late martyrdom,
which interfered with his freedom of speech; and it would have been
more to his taste to sleep in a hovel alone, than in that luxurious
chamber in company. And so well founded did his apprehension prove,
and so correct was his anticipation, that scarcely had his master got
into bed when he said, "What dost thou think of tonight's adventure,
Sancho? Great and mighty is the power of cold-hearted scorn, for thou
with thine own eyes hast seen Altisidora slain, not by arrows, nor by
the sword, nor by any warlike weapon, nor by deadly poisons, but by
the thought of the sternness and scorn with which I have always
treated her." "She might have died and welcome," said Sancho, "when
she pleased and how she pleased; and she might have left me alone, for
I never made her fall in love or scorned her. I don't know nor can I
imagine how the recovery of Altisidora, a damsel more fanciful than
wise, can have, as I have said before, anything to do with the
sufferings of Sancho Panza. Now I begin to see plainly and clearly
that there are enchanters and enchanted people in the world; and may
God deliver me from them, since I can't deliver myself; and so I beg
of your worship to let me sleep and not ask me any more questions,
unless you want me to throw myself out of the window." "Sleep, Sancho
my friend," said Don Quixote, "if the pinprodding and pinches thou
hast received and the smacks administered to thee will let thee." "No
pain came up to the insult of the smacks," said Sancho, "for the
simple reason that it was duennas, confound them, that gave them to
me; but once more I entreat your worship to let me sleep, for sleep is
relief from misery to those who are miserable when awake." "Be it so,
and God be with thee," said Don Quixote. They fell asleep, both of
them, and Cide Hamete, the author of this great history, took this
opportunity to record and relate what it was that induced the duke and
duchess to get up the elaborate plot that has been described. The
bachelor Samson Carrasco, he says, not forgetting how he as the Knight
of the Mirrors had been vanquished and overthrown by Don Quixote,
which defeat and overthrow upset all his plans, resolved to try his
hand again, hoping for better luck than he had before; and so, having
learned where Don Quixote was from the page who brought the letter and
present to Sancho's wife, Teresa Panza, he got himself new armour and
another horse, and put a white moon upon his shield, and to carry his
arms he had a mule led by a peasant, not by Tom Cecial his former
squire for fear he should be recognised by Sancho or Don Quixote. He
came to the duke's castle, and the duke informed him of the road and
route Don Quixote had taken with the intention of being present at the
jousts at Saragossa. He told him, too, of the jokes he had practised
upon him, and of the device for the disenchantment of Dulcinea at the
expense of Sancho's backside; and finally he gave him an account of
the trick Sancho had played upon his master, making him believe that
Dulcinea was enchanted and turned into a country wench; and of how the
duchess, his wife, had persuaded Sancho that it was he himself who was
deceived, inasmuch as Dulcinea was really enchanted; at which the
bachelor laughed not a little, and marvelled as well at the sharpness
and simplicity of Sancho as at the length to which Don Quixote's
madness went. The duke begged of him if he found him (whether he
overcame him or not) to return that way and let him know the result.
This the bachelor did; he set out in quest of Don Quixote, and not
finding him at Saragossa, he went on, and how he fared has been
already told. He returned to the duke's castle and told him all, what
the conditions of the combat were, and how Don Quixote was now, like a
loyal knight-errant, returning to keep his promise of retiring to his
village for a year, by which time, said the bachelor, he might perhaps
be cured of his madness; for that was the object that had led him to
adopt these disguises, as it was a sad thing for a gentleman of such
good parts as Don Quixote to be a madman. And so he took his leave of
the duke, and went home to his village to wait there for Don Quixote,
who was coming after him. Thereupon the duke seized the opportunity of
practising this mystification upon him; so much did he enjoy
everything connected with Sancho and Don Quixote. He had the roads
about the castle far and near, everywhere he thought Don Quixote was
likely to pass on his return, occupied by large numbers of his
servants on foot and on horseback, who were to bring him to the
castle, by fair means or foul, if they met him. They did meet him, and
sent word to the duke, who, having already settled what was to be
done, as soon as he heard of his arrival, ordered the torches and
lamps in the court to be lit and Altisidora to be placed on the
catafalque with all the pomp and ceremony that has been described, the
whole affair being so well arranged and acted that it differed but
little from reality. And Cide Hamete says, moreover, that for his part
he considers the concocters of the joke as crazy as the victims of it,
and that the duke and duchess were not two fingers' breadth removed
from being something like fools themselves when they took such pains
to make game of a pair of fools. As for the latter, one was sleeping
soundly and the other lying awake occupied with his desultory
thoughts, when daylight came to them bringing with it the desire to
rise; for the lazy down was never a delight to Don Quixote, victor or
vanquished. Altisidora, come back from death to life as Don Quixote
fancied, following up the freak of her lord and lady, entered the
chamber, crowned with the garland she had worn on the catafalque and
in a robe of white taffeta embroidered with gold flowers, her hair
flowing loose over her shoulders, and leaning upon a staff of fine
black ebony. Don Quixote, disconcerted and in confusion at her
appearance, huddled himself up and well-nigh covered himself
altogether with the sheets and counterpane of the bed, tongue-tied,
and unable to offer her any civility. Altisidora seated herself on a
chair at the head of the bed, and, after a deep sigh, said to him in a
feeble, soft voice, "When women of rank and modest maidens trample
honour under foot, and give a loose to the tongue that breaks through
every impediment, publishing abroad the inmost secrets of their
hearts, they are reduced to sore extremities. Such a one am I, Senor
Don Quixote of La Mancha, crushed, conquered, love-smitten, but yet
patient under suffering and virtuous, and so much so that my heart
broke with grief and I lost my life. For the last two days I have been
dead, slain by the thought of the cruelty with which thou hast treated
me, obdurate knight, O harder thou than marble to my plaint; or at
least believed to be dead by all who saw me; and had it not been that
Love, taking pity on me, let my recovery rest upon the sufferings of
this good squire, there I should have remained in the other world."
"Love might very well have let it rest upon the sufferings of my ass,
and I should have been obliged to him," said Sancho. "But tell me,
senora--and may heaven send you a tenderer lover than my master-what
did you see in the other world? What goes on in hell? For of course
that's where one who dies in despair is bound for." "To tell you the
truth," said Altisidora, "I cannot have died outright, for I did not
go into hell; had I gone in, it is very certain I should never have
come out again, do what I might. The truth is, I came to the gate,
where some dozen or so of devils were playing tennis, all in breeches
and doublets, with falling collars trimmed with Flemish bonelace, and
ruffles of the same that served them for wristbands, with four
fingers' breadth of the arms exposed to make their hands look longer;
in their hands they held rackets of fire; but what amazed me still
more was that books, apparently full of wind and rubbish, served them
for tennis balls, a strange and marvellous thing; this, however, did
not astonish me so much as to observe that, although with players it
is usual for the winners to be glad and the losers sorry, there in
that game all were growling, all were snarling, and all were cursing
one another." "That's no wonder," said Sancho; "for devils, whether
playing or not, can never be content, win or lose." "Very likely,"
said Altisidora; "but there is another thing that surprises me too, I
mean surprised me then, and that was that no ball outlasted the first
throw or was of any use a second time; and it was wonderful the
constant succession there was of books, new and old. To one of them, a
brand-new, well-bound one, they gave such a stroke that they knocked
the guts out of it and scattered the leaves about. 'Look what book
that is,' said one devil to another, and the other replied, 'It is the
"Second Part of the History of Don Quixote of La Mancha," not by Cide
Hamete, the original author, but by an Aragonese who by his own
account is of Tordesillas.' 'Out of this with it,' said the first,
'and into the depths of hell with it out of my sight.' 'Is it so bad?'
said the other. 'So bad is it,' said the first, 'that if I had set
myself deliberately to make a worse, I could not have done it.' They
then went on with their game, knocking other books about; and I,
having heard them mention the name of Don Quixote whom I love and
adore so, took care to retain this vision in my memory." "A vision it
must have been, no doubt," said Don Quixote, "for there is no other I
in the world; this history has been going about here for some time
from hand to hand, but it does not stay long in any, for everybody
gives it a taste of his foot. I am not disturbed by hearing that I am
wandering in a fantastic shape in the darkness of the pit or in the
daylight above, for I am not the one that history treats of. If it
should be good, faithful, and true, it will have ages of life; but if
it should be bad, from its birth to its burial will not be a very long
journey." Altisidora was about to proceed with her complaint against
Don Quixote, when he said to her, "I have several times told you,
senora that it grieves me you should have set your affections upon me,
as from mine they can only receive gratitude, but no return. I was
born to belong to Dulcinea del Toboso, and the fates, if there are
any, dedicated me to her; and to suppose that any other beauty can
take the place she occupies in my heart is to suppose an
impossibility. This frank declaration should suffice to make you
retire within the bounds of your modesty, for no one can bind himself
to do impossibilities." Hearing this, Altisidora, with a show of anger
and agitation, exclaimed, "God's life! Don Stockfish, soul of a
mortar, stone of a date, more obstinate and obdurate than a clown
asked a favour when he has his mind made up, if I fall upon you I'll
tear your eyes out! Do you fancy, Don Vanquished, Don Cudgelled, that
I died for your sake? All that you have seen to-night has been
make-believe; I'm not the woman to let the black of my nail suffer for
such a camel, much less die!" "That I can well believe," said Sancho;
"for all that about lovers pining to death is absurd; they may talk of
it, but as for doing it-Judas may believe that!" While they were
talking, the musician, singer, and poet, who had sung the two stanzas
given above came in, and making a profound obeisance to Don Quixote
said, "Will your worship, sir knight, reckon and retain me in the
number of your most faithful servants, for I have long been a great
admirer of yours, as well because of your fame as because of your
achievements?" "Will your worship tell me who you are," replied Don
Quixote, "so that my courtesy may be answerable to your deserts?" The
young man replied that he was the musician and songster of the night
before. "Of a truth," said Don Quixote, "your worship has a most
excellent voice; but what you sang did not seem to me very much to the
purpose; for what have Garcilasso's stanzas to do with the death of
this lady?" "Don't be surprised at that," returned the musician; "for
with the callow poets of our day the way is for every one to write as
he pleases and pilfer where he chooses, whether it be germane to the
matter or not, and now-a-days there is no piece of silliness they can
sing or write that is not set down to poetic licence." Don Quixote was
about to reply, but was prevented by the duke and duchess, who came in
to see him, and with them there followed a long and delightful
conversation, in the course of which Sancho said so many droll and
saucy things that he left the duke and duchess wondering not only at
his simplicity but at his sharpness. Don Quixote begged their
permission to take his departure that same day, inasmuch as for a
vanquished knight like himself it was fitter he should live in a
pig-sty than in a royal palace. They gave it very readily, and the
duchess asked him if Altisidora was in his good graces. He replied,
"Senora, let me tell your ladyship that this damsel's ailment comes
entirely of idleness, and the cure for it is honest and constant
employment. She herself has told me that lace is worn in hell; and as
she must know how to make it, let it never be out of her hands; for
when she is occupied in shifting the bobbins to and fro, the image or
images of what she loves will not shift to and fro in her thoughts;
this is the truth, this is my opinion, and this is my advice." "And
mine," added Sancho; "for I never in all my life saw a lace-maker that
died for love; when damsels are at work their minds are more set on
finishing their tasks than on thinking of their loves. I speak from my
own experience; for when I'm digging I never think of my old woman; I
mean my Teresa Panza, whom I love better than my own eyelids." "You
say well, Sancho," said the duchess, "and I will take care that my
Altisidora employs herself henceforward in needlework of some sort;
for she is extremely expert at it." "There is no occasion to have
recourse to that remedy, senora," said Altisidora; "for the mere
thought of the cruelty with which this vagabond villain has treated me
will suffice to blot him out of my memory without any other device;
with your highness's leave I will retire, not to have before my eyes,
I won't say his rueful countenance, but his abominable, ugly looks."
"That reminds me of the common saying, that 'he that rails is ready to
forgive,'" said the duke. Altisidora then, pretending to wipe away her
tears with a handkerchief, made an obeisance to her master and
mistress and quitted the room. "Ill luck betide thee, poor damsel,"
said Sancho, "ill luck betide thee! Thou hast fallen in with a soul as
dry as a rush and a heart as hard as oak; had it been me, i'faith
'another cock would have crowed to thee.'" So the conversation came to
an end, and Don Quixote dressed himself and dined with the duke and
duchess, and set out the same evening. CHAPTER LXXI. OF WHAT PASSED
BETWEEN DON QUIXOTE AND HIS SQUIRE, TOGETHER WITH OTHER VERY NOTABLE
INCIDENTS CHAPTER VIII WHEREIN IS RELATED WHAT BEFELL DON QUIXOTE ON
HIS WAY TO SEE HIS LADY DULCINEA DEL TOBOSO CHAPTER IX WHEREIN IS
RELATED WHAT WILL BE SEEN THERE 'Twas at the very midnight hour--more
or less--when Don Quixote and Sancho quitted the wood and entered El
Toboso. The town was in deep silence, for all the inhabitants were
asleep, and stretched on the broad of their backs, as the saying is.
The night was darkish, though Sancho would have been glad had it been
quite dark, so as to find in the darkness an excuse for his
blundering. All over the place nothing was to be heard except the
barking of dogs, which deafened the ears of Don Quixote and Sancho
Panza, and they could not make out what it was. The wide-spread
grunting drove came on in a surging mass, and without showing any
respect for Don Quixote's dignity or Sancho's, passed right over the
pair of them, demolishing Sancho's entrenchments, and not only
upsetting Don Quixote but sweeping Rocinante off his feet into the
bargain; and what with the trampling and the grunting, and the pace at
which the unclean beasts went, pack-saddle, armour, Dapple and
Rocinante were left scattered on the ground
